
==================================================
SECTION: Power (Pages 28-59)
==================================================

--- PAGE 28 ---
 
 
17 
 
3. POWER  
3.1 Introduction+
Spacecraft function relies on electrical power. The power system typically 
accounts for 20 -30% of the total spacecraft mass. The three subsystems are 
power generation, storage, and distribution (Lyons, 2012). Each subsystem  is 
approximately one third the total power system mass. Mission requirements for 
average and peak power, solar intensity, and duration of eclipses dictate the 
system architecture. While long missions require power generation, shorter 
missions can solely r ely on energy stored in batteries. The NASA Technology 
Roadmap aims to improve power systems for all spacecraft weight classes, 
however not all of these technologies are applicable to small satellites.  
3.2 State+of+the+Art+
3.2.1 Power+Generation+
Solar cells generat e electricity by harvesting Sunlight using the photovoltaic 
effect. Solar intensity varies as the inverse square of the distance from the Sun. 
The amount of energy converted varies as a cosine function of the angle between 
the cell and the Sun. Solar cells degrade during their mission lifetime. This is 
characterized by the End of Life/Beginning of Life (EOL/BOL) ratio, which can be 
as high as 96% and low as 60%. The solar cell output at EOL will determine size 
requirements for the particular miss ion. A protective coverglass material over 
the cell resists light -reflection, darkening, and ultraviolet radiation damage. 
Triple junction solar co nversion efficiency is about 29% in production while 
research cells approach 38% . The cells usually include p rotective diodes to stop 
reverse current flow when the cells are in partial shadow while in space. Solar 
panels are assembled from individual cells. State of the art  panels suitable for  
CubeSats can provide more than 50 W  according to kit manufacturers. Sp ectrolab 
Inc., produces a Triangular Advanced Solar Cell (TASC), which has the advantage 
of fitting odd form factors on small satellites without the need to custom cut 
individual solar cells. Other issues with turning cells into panel arrays involve 
matching individual cells in terms of current and voltage (Kalman , 2012).  

--- PAGE 29 ---
 
 
18 
 
Table 1: Power generation with solar cells for small satellites. 
Technology Description Developer TRL Name Status Figures
Triangular shape, 
Solar cell Improved Triple 
Junction (ITJ), 
SpectroLab 
(USA) On 
9
orbit
Efficiency 27%
Solar cell NeXt 
(XTJ), 
Triple Junction 
Efficiency 29.5%
SpectroLab 
(USA) On 
9
orbit
Solar cell
BTJ / ZTJ Space Solar 
Cell, Efficiency 27-
29.5%
Emcore 
(USA) On 
9
orbit
Solar cell
Triple Juction Solar 
Cell, 3G28 / 3G30 
Efficiency 28 -30%
AzurSpace 
Solar 
(Germany) On 
9
orbit
Solar panel Panel of SpectorLab 
AzurSpace cells
or Clyde 
(UK) On 
9
orbit
Solar panel PMDSAS for 1/2/3U 
CubeSats
Pum pkin 
(USA) On 
9
orbit
 
 
 
 
3.2.2 Energy+Storage+
During eclipse periods or peak power needs, batteries use chemically stored 
energy as the source of power. Primary one -time-use batteries can have a long 
mission life; however their chemistry differs from that of rechargeable batteries. 
Battery technology is at TRL 9 and includes 3.7 V Lithium Ion batteries, usually in 
cylindrical form  factor of 18.4 x 65.1 mm, and the latest lithium polymer 
batteries in a flat form factor such as used in modern mobile phones. Table 2 
and Table 3 illustrate the general characteristics of different bat tery types for 
small spacecraft. 

--- PAGE 30 ---
 
 
19 
 
 
Tabl
e 2: General characteristics of battery technology (Lyons 2012) . 
Specific Energy Operting Mission Life Battery Chemistry Mission Energy Density Temp. Range Cycle Life Issues(yrs)(Wh/kg) (Wh/l) (°C)
 
 Launch 
Primary 
 
Ag-Zn
Li-SO2
Li-SOCl2
vehic les, 
Cassini, MER 
lander, 
Sojourner 
90-250 130-500  -20 to 60 1  1-9
Limited temp. 
range & 
voltage d ec ay
Rover
 Rechargable Ni-Cd
Ni-H2
ToPex, HST, 
Space Station 24-35  10-80  -5 to 30 >50,000 @ 25% 
DOD >10 Heavy/bulky 
& temp. range
 
Advanced Li-Ion
Li-Polymer
MER rovers, 
Cubesat 100 250  -20 to 30 >400 @ 50% 
DOD >2 Cycle life
Batteries are a commodity item available from a variety of manufacturers in raw 
form; “raw” meaning unprotected from thermal runaway. Batteries can have 
protection circuits built into the individual cell, and without protection circuits 
they are referred to as raw batteries. Li -Ion batteries have one -time thermal 
protection that opens the circuit to prevent thermal runaway conditions. Small 
satellite engineers perform acceptance testing on individual COTS battery cells 
and assemble them into battery packs according to mission needs. As an 
alternative to buying COTS batteries, t here are also  companies that make their 
own space-qualified batteries . 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 31 ---
 
 
20 
 
Table 3: Battery options for small satellites . 
 
 
Technology 
Name Description Developer TRL Status Figures
 
Primary 
 
battery
 
Ag-Zn, SZHR50, 0.76kg, 
1.5 V, 50 AHr 
Eagle Picher
(USA) Not 
6
flown on small 
satellite
 Primary battery Ag-Zn, Silvercels, 
0.1-20k AH
1.5 V, Yardney
(USA) Not 
6
flown on small 
satellite
 
 
Rechargable 
battery
Ni-H2, SAR10097, 28kg, 
10 V, 75 AHr 
Eagle Picher
(USA) Not 
6
flown on small 
satellite
 Advanced 
battery
Li-Ion, custom from 
space qualified COTS
ABSL Space 
Products
(UK / USA)
Not 
6
flown on small 
satellite
 
 
Advanced 
battery
Li-Polymer, 8.2 
Ahr
V, 1.24 Clyde Space 
Ltd.
(UK)
Not 
6
flown on small 
satellite
 
 
Advanced 
battery
Li-Ion 
V, 
#VEL / 
4.5 - 50 
#VL, 
Ahr
3.6 Saft SA     
(France/ 
USA)
 
Not 
6
flown on small 
satellite
 Advanced 
battery
Li-Ion #18650HC raw 
#19670 protected
Sony
(Japan) Not 
6
flown on small 
satellite
 
Advanced 
battery 
Li-Ion Lithion 3.6V 
350 AHr
7- Yardney 
(USA) Not 
6
flown on small 
satellite
3.2.3 Power+Management+and+Distribution+
Satellite power distribution architectures include voltages regulated centrally or 
distributed along with Direct Energy Transfer (DET) or Peak Power Tracking 
(PPT); small satellites follow the same power distribution architectures as well. A 
study of 33 CubeSat power systems where data was availab le revealed 20 
centralized and five distributed with 13 DET and 15 PPT, with DET favored in the 
newer designs (Burt , 2011). In a DET architecture, the regulation mechanism 
matches the solar power voltage to the load(s) and there are no intermediate 
components to dissipate excess powe r, thus making it the most efficient power 

--- PAGE 32 ---
 
 
21 
 
regul
ation of the two available methods. A PPT design has a series regulation 
device between the solar arrays and loads, which regulates how much current is 
extracted from the array (Burt , 2011). Nanosatellite Electrical Power Systems (EPS) 
typically have a main battery bus voltage of 8.2 V but can distribute a regulated 
5.0 V and 3.3  V to various subsystems. The EPS also protects the electronics and 
batteries from non -nominal current and voltage conditions. The ma in 
commercial CubeSat EPS suppliers are Pumpkin Inc., GomSpace ApS., Stras Space,  
and Clyde Space  Ltd. The manufacturer’s datasheets generally mention quality 
and acceptance component testing as well as flight  qualified heritage. SpaceMicro  
Inc., lists com mercially-available radiation -hardened systems and testing 
methods for qualifying systems for space applications. Improvements in the 
electronic components for the power management and distribution systems are 
due to trends in consumer electronics rather t han manufacturers being 
responsive to the needs of  the space industry.  
3.3 On+the+Horizon+
3.3.1 Power+Generation+
There are new technologies for power generation that are currently being 
assessed for smaller spacecraft applications . The areas include improved solar 
efficiencies, regenerative fuel cells, space tethers, and numerous methods to 
harvest the heat from radioactive decay. Four -junction solar cel ls are on a 
roadmap to reach 50% efficiency, but currently rese arch laboratory cells are at 
43% under concentrated  solar conditions . Specification sheets are not available 
so it is unknown if the addition of another layer on the solar cell (“the fourth 
junction”) results in an equivalent power –to-weight-ratio. 
Fuel cells might be a more effective technology to generat e power during long 
eclipse periods when compared to photovoltaics and battery power; however, no 
fuel cell has advanced beyond laboratory tests. In addition to system lifetime, the 
obstacles to overcome include minimizing mass, volume, and the parasitic power 
requirement. One development program by Boeing/Saint Louis University called 
BillikenSat-II was a CubeSat that was powered by beer, but the status of the 
program is unknown (Pais, et al. , 2007). Figure 6 shows the relative energy 
densities of fuel cells (Pais et al. , 2007). It should be noted that fuel cells cannot 

--- PAGE 33 ---
 
 
22
 
 
be
 recharged on orbit hundreds of times like advanced batteries, but 
regenerative fuel cells are also being researched. Another program is the 2011 
JPL/USC 300 W suitcase -sized prototype Direct Methanol Fuel Cell developed for 
DARPA at TRL 3 (Vega , 2011). 
 
Figure 6: Relative stored energy for candidate fuel cells (Pais, et al., 2007). 
Although electrodynamic power generation is possible using conductive space 
tethers, as shown with the Tethered Satellite System aboard STS -75, no tests are 
planned on small satellites. Electric tethers require the magnetic fie ld of the 
Earth to harvest electrons at th e cost of reducing the orbital kinetic energy. The 
satellite must be launched to a sufficiently high altitude to prevent reentry due 
to drag before the mission ends , but the output can be several hundred volts per 
kilometer of tether.  


--- PAGE 34 ---
 
 
23 
 
Another method in power generation is 
utilization of  radioactive decay. Small 
nuclear devices have the potential to be an 
enabling technology for small satellites and 
landers if solar energy is unavailable. Figure 
7 shows that radioisotope thermoelectric 
generators (RTG) have been used for 
primary power supply  since the beginning 
of the space program. The smaller Multi -
Mission RTG (MMRTG) used on the Mars 
Science Lab Curiosity has a mass of 44 kg 
and generates 125 W, which could be 
utilized on small satellites. T here are also 
lightweight Radioisotope Heating Units 
(RHU), shown in , used to keep components 
like circuits and rechargeable batteries 
above 0°C. 
A full size RTG ,
  such as on New Horizons mission to Pluto (Radioisotope Power 
Systems, New Horizons 2012) , has a mass of  56 kg and can supply 300W (6.3% 
efficiency) at the beginning of its life. Future developments on Advanced Stirling 
Radioisotope Generators ( ASRG) are looking to increase efficiency to 28% with a 
mass of 20 kg to generate 143  W, but are only at TRL 5 (Vining & Bennett , 2010).  
Figure 7: Evolution of RTG technology  
(Rockwell, 1992). 
Radioactive heat sources are mainly 
Plutonium-238 in the form of Plutonium 
Oxide, PuO
2, with a half -life of about 87 
years. Other candidates are Curium -242 
and Americium -241. Generally, power 
density roughly scales inversely with 
half-life. Americium’s power density is 
less than a quarter of Plutonium with a 
half-life of 432 years. Compared to 
Figure 8: Light Weight Radioisotope Heater Unit 
compared to the size of a U.S. one cent penny (Image 
credit: LANL, found in Cataldo, et al., 2011 ). 

--- PAGE 35 ---
 
 
24 
 
Plutonium, both require more radiation shielding, with Curium requiring 
significantly more due to gamma particle emission. Americium’s lower output 
results in a higher mass system for the same electrical output.  
At a lower TRL, beta - and alpha -voltaic power conversion system s use a 
secondary material to absorb the energetic particles and re -emit the energy 
through luminescence. These photons  can then be absorbed via photovoltaic 
cells. Methods for retrieving electrical energy out of radioactive sources include 
beta-voltaic, alpha -voltaic, thermophotovoltaic, piezoelectric, and mechanic al 
conversions. 
Thermophotovoltaic power converters are similar to high TRL thermoelectric 
converters, with the difference that the latter uses thermocouples and the former 
uses infrared-tuned photovoltaic cells. Thermophotovoltaics are technically 
challenging because they require the radioisotope fuel to have a temperature of 
>1273 K for high infrared emission, whilst maintaining temperature suitable for 
photovoltaic cells (<323  K) for efficient electrical conversion. These devices are 
predicted to produce  tens of watts of power at specific powers of 6  W/kg. The 
radioisotope fuel of choice is Plutonium -238 in the form of Pu-O 2, which, 
however, requires Congressional authorization to use. Other options are Curium 
and Americium.  
Piezoelectric power converte rs are miniature electromechanical devices that 
utilize a cantilever beam system to convert vibrational energy into electrical  
 
Figure 9: Advanced Stirling Convertor (Image credit: 
Sunpower, Inc.). 

--- PAGE 36 ---
25 
energy via a piezoelectric thin -film. A miniature cell has been tested to produce 
15 µW with dimensions 4.5 mm × 2 mm × 1 µm.  
NASA Glenn is developing both the Small Radioisotope Power System (SRPS) . An 
example of t he ASRG convertor developed by Sunpower, Inc. is shown in Figure 
9. These utilize linear Stirling actuators and a 30% efficient thermodynamic cycle 
using a piston to convert thermal and mechanical  energy to electrical energy. A 
single SRPS device is aimed at producing 80 W of power with a specific power of 
7 W/kg.  Table 4 shows future technologies in power generation for small 
satellites. The table is heavily weighted to using radioisotope heat sources and 
advanced mechanical or photovoltaic harvesting methods. NASA Glenn is the 
lead center in space power generation research.  
Table 4: Future technologies in power generation for small satellites . 
Technology 
 Name Description Developer TRL Status Figures
 Thermoelectric 
power 
conversion
 
Thermal energy from 
a radioisotope is 
converted via a 
thermocouple to 
produce a voltage 
difference
NASA Glenn
(USA)
6
Flown on larger 
satellites and Mars 
rovers
 Beta-voltaic 
power 
 conversion
β particles emitted 
from a radioisotope 
are absorbed with a 
p/n junction diode to 
produce electron-hole 
pairs
NASA Glenn
(USA)
5
Non-satellite 
applications
 
Alpha-voltaic 
power  
conversion
α particles emitted 
from a radioisotope 
are absorbed with a 
p/n junction diode to 
produce electron-hole 
pairs
NASA Glenn
(USA) Analysis
2
 and laboratory 
testing
N/A
 
Thermophoto-
 voltaic power 
conversion
 
Infrared radiation 
emited from a hot 
radioisotope is 
absorbed with an 
infared photovoltaic 
cell 
University 
Toronto 
(Canada)
of 
Analysis
2
 and laboratory 
testing
 
Piezoelectric 
power  conversion
 
A miniature cantilever 
beam is bombarded 
with radiation from a 
radioisotope source, 
and the vibrational 
energy is converted 
via piezoelectrics
University 
Toronto 
(Canada)
of 
Analysis
2
 and laboratory 
testing
Small 
radioisotope 
power system
Stirling 
thermodynamic cycle 
power conversion 
from a radioisotope
NASA Glenn
(USA) Analysis
2
 and laboratory 
testing


--- PAGE 37 ---
 
 
26 
 
3.3.2 Energy+Storage+
There is no thing to  indicate new battery technology  developments for small 
satellite systems. One issue may be that large firms are not activ ely marketing to 
the small satellite manufacturers. C OTS batteries are put through quality 
assurance testing and then custom integrated into products intended for the 
small satellite market.  
3.3.3 Power+Management+and+Distribution+
There is a general need to miniaturize and radiation-harden electronic 
components for single event upsets. No evidence of progress in that direction 
(focused on small satellite technology ) could be found during the limited amount 
of time assigned to this s tudy. 
3.4 Conclusion+
Small spacecraft are using advanced power generation and energy storage 
technology, namely 29% efficient triple- junction solar cells and lithium ion 
batteries. Today’s small spacecraft mission designers  are faced with  stringent 
mass and vo lume restrictions  and requirements  and have  a higher risk 
tolerance— which has led to the industry’s early adoption of flat lithium polymer 
battery packs . All the power subsystems benefit from technology advances and 
component miniaturization in the consumer electronics market. Figure 10: 
Advances in solar cell efficiency by cell type (National Renewable Energy 
Laboratory, 2013).  shows the general trend of solar cell efficiency over the last 
three decades. Figure 11 shows energy storage density by volume and mass 
versus battery chemistry.   

--- PAGE 38 ---
 
 
27
 
 
 
 
Figure 10: Advances in solar cell efficiency by cell type (National Renewable Energy 
Laboratory, 2013). 
Figure 11: Comparison of energy storage density by volume and mass versus battery chemistry 
(Wagner, 2006 ©Woodbank Communications, Ltd).  

--- PAGE 39 ---
 
 
28
 
 
3.5 References+
Anonymous: Datasheet [Online], 2002. Available at: 
http://www.spectrolab.com/DataSheets/PV/PV_NM_TASC_ITJ.pdf  
[Accessed August 2013].  
Banks, J.: Technology Thrusts [Online], 2012. Available at: 
https://rt.grc.nasa.gov/power -in-space-propulsion/photovoltaics -power-
technologies/technology -thrusts/ [Accessed August 2013].  
Burt, R.: Distributed Electrical Power System in CubeSat Applications. s.l.: All 
Graduate Theses and Dissertations . School of DigitalCommons@USU , 2011. 
Cataldo, R., Bennett, G.: US Space Radioisotope Power Systems and Applications: 
Past, Present and Future. Cleveland: s.n., 2011. 
Dimroth, F.: 43.6 % Four-Junction Solar Cell under Concentrated Sunlight New 
Manufacturing Technologies allow for Higher Efficiencies [Online], 2013. 
Available at: http://www.ise.fraunhofer.de/en/press -and-media/press-
releases/presseinformationen -2013/43.6-four-junction-solar-cell-under-
concentrated-Sunlight [Accessed August 2013].  
Dow, A., Schmid, U. , Kherani, N. P.: Analysis and Modeling of a Piezoelectric 
Energy Harvester Stimulated by β-emitting Radioisotopes.  Smart Materials and 
Structures Journal,  20(1), pp. 1-9, 2011. 
Dyches, P.: Radioisotope Power Systems, New Horizons [Online], 2012. 
Available at: http://solarsystem.nasa.gov/rps/newhorizons.cfm  
[Accessed August 2013].  
Fraeman, M. et al.: Small Radioisotope Power System at NASA Glenn Research 
Center. s.l.:s.n., 2011. 
Furano, G.: Review of Rad Hard electronics activities at European Space Agency. 
Topical Workshop on Electronics for Particle Physics (TWEPP) . Oxford, UK, 2012. 
Kalman, A.: Enhanced Power Systems for CubeSats. San Luis Obispo, s.n. , 2012. 

--- PAGE 40 ---
 
 
29
 
 
Landis, G. et al.: Non-solar photovoltaics for small space missions. Austin, s.n., p. 
2819 – 2824, 2012. 
Lange, R., Carroll, W.: Review of Recent Advances of Radioisotope Power Systems.  
Energy Conversion and Management Journal,  49(3), pp. 393-401, 2008. 
Lyons, V. J., Gonzalez, G. A., Houts, M. G. , Iannello, C. J.: Space Power and Energy 
Storage Roadmap, Technology Area 03. s.l., NASA, 2012. 
Otting, W., Gard, L., Hammel, T. E. , Bennett, R.: Preparation of the MMRTG for the 
Mars Science Laboratory Mission. Atlanta, s.n., 2012. 
Reinhard, W.: Electropaedia. [Online], 2006. 
Available at: http://www.maximintegrated.com/app -notes/index.mvp/id/3958 !
Rockwell International . Dynamic Isotope Power Systems (DIPS) for Space 
Exploration – Technical Information, BC92 -68, Rocketdyne Division, Canoga Park, 
California, 1992.  
Sunpower, Inc. [Online], 2013. Available at: 
http://sunpowerinc.com/services/applications/asc.php  [Accesses October 2013].  
Vega, P.: JPL-Developed Clean Energy Technology Moves Forward [Online], 2011.  
Available at: http://www.jpl.nasa.gov/news/news.php?release=2011 -163 
[Accessed August 2013].  
Vining, C., Bennett & Ga ry, L.: Power for Science and  Exploration: Upgrading the 
General Purpose Heat Source Radioisotope Thermoelectric Generator. Nashville, 
s.n., pp. 1-15, 2010. 
Woodbank Communications, Ltd  [Online] 2013 Available at: 
www.mpoweruk.com .. [Accessed October 2013].  
 
 
 

--- PAGE 41 ---
 
 
30
 
 
4. PROPULSION 
4.1 Introduction+
Miniaturized propulsion systems for small spacecraft are advancing rapidly in 
ability and are the subject of great attention. Small spacecraft have numerous 
proposed objectives that can be attained by using propulsion systems: 
responsive space systems and communication platforms; distributed and 
fractionated satellite architectures that rely on pre cise formation flying; and 
scientific research and remote sensing of Earth and beyond.  
Although numerous systems such as ion  electrospray and miniaturized H all 
thrusters are currently in development and show great promise for high specific 
impulse and efficiency, the SoA in small satellite propulsion is limited to cold gas 
thrusters, solid rocket motors, and pulsed plasma thrusters. However, serious 
challenges exist for such systems to achieve a mature level of adoption and flight 
heritage. Associated technology requirements for the full utilization and 
realization of small spacecraft propulsion are deployable solar arrays, thermal 
management systems, and miniaturi zed power processing units (PPU s) sufficient 
for high voltage  requirements. The increase in mi ssion capabilities provided by 
small satellite propulsion is also proving to be a driver for development by 
numerous institutions.  
As a secondary payload, small spacecraft cannot interfere with the primary 
mission, which has led to the development of  relatively benign thruster 
technologies such as cold gas and electric propulsion. While some small satellites 
can be custom built and launched as a higher priority or primary mission, the 
CubeSat Design Specification (CDS) agreed upon between CubeSat builders a nd 
launch vehicle providers require a waiver to deviate from general requirements 
(CDS Rev 13, 2013). These requirements limit potential propulsion systems in 
addition to CubeSat dimensions: less than 1.33 kg mass for 1U, up to 4.0 kg 
mass for 3U, pressuri zation less than 1.2 standard  atmospheres, less than 100 
W-Hr of stored chemical energy, and no hazardous materials.  
 

--- PAGE 42 ---
 
 
31
 
 
4.2 State+of+the+Art+
4.2.1 Cold+Gas+Thrusters+
The simplest propulsion system available to small spacecraft vents a cold, 
pressurized gas through a n ozzle. The specific impulse of a cold nitrogen gas 
system is less than 75 sec  and thrust levels are less than 5 N. The system does 
not have a pump and is referred to as a blow down system, where the pressure of 
the system decreases with time. It is possible to have a high -pressure tank with a 
regulator to vent the gas at a lower pressure for a longer amount of time, but the 
total impulse delivered is the same since it is a function of the pressure force 
over time. Many cold gas systems used on larger satell ites are theoretically 
usable on small satellites, however their use on CubeSats may be limited due to 
valve power requirements even if sufficiently low in mass and volume. While no 
CubeSat has yet flown a cold gas thruster, Surrey Space flew SNAP -1, a 6.5 kg 
small satellite with a 450 g butane cold gas system from Polyflex Aerospace, Ltd, 
which performed proximity operations on orbit.  
Different gases are available as propellants; nitrogen and helium are popular for 
pressurization because they do not chemic ally react, but they may require a 
pressure regulator to function with an on/off valve. Propellants with a critical 
temperature above the ambient exist only in the gas phase, while those below the 
critical temperature are liquid. Propellants below the crit ical temperature such as 
propane, sulfur hexafluoride, and butane are self -pressurizing, negating the need 
for a pump, and they have a higher storage density in liquid form. Because 
operational safety is of primary importance in CubeSats, there is active 
development of cold gas systems for small satellites. Butane has the lowest vapor 
pressure at room temperature, as shown in Table 5. Because butane’s low 
pressure allows for non -spherical or flat -wall tank designs, 3D -printers can 
manufacture conforming tanks.  
 
 

--- PAGE 43 ---
 
 
32 
 
Technology Description Developer TRL Status FiguresName
 VACCO Cold gas n-Butane, 0.025 N 7Spacethruster Isp 70 sec Tested, not flown(USA)
Polyflex 
Cold gas MPS, n-Butane, 0.01N Aerospace 9
thruster Isp 69 sec LTD Flown on SNAP-1
(UK)
VACCO Cold gas 9SF6, 0.05 N, Isp 45 sec Spacethruster Flown on Can X-2(USA)
58E143/144/145/146
Cold gas Nitrogen, 0.016-0.04 N Moog 9
thruster Isp 65 sec (USA) NASA CHAMP
 
Table 5: Comparison of propellants used in cold gas systems . 
 
Table 6 shows the SoA in cold gas systems. Currently, several nitrogen cold gas 
systems are available, yet many systems may prove to be ineffective on a small 
satellite due to limitations of valve power, volume, and mass requirements.  
Table 6: List of a few small satellite cold gas propulsion systems . 
4.2.2 Chemical+Propulsion+
Chemical propulsion systems use a chemical reaction to produ ce a high-pressure, 
high-temperature gas that accelerates out of a nozzle. Chemical propellant can 

--- PAGE 44 ---
 
 
33 
 
be l
iquid, solid or a hybrid of both. Liquid propellants can be a monopropellant 
passed through a catalyst. A more conventional bipropellant is a mix of oxid izer 
and fuel. A solid rocket motor contains both an oxidizer and a fuel that are 
molded into various grain patterns.  
 The benefits of monopropellants and solid systems include relatively low -
complexity/high-thrust output, low power requirements, and high  reliability. 
Liquid and hybrid systems can be stopped and re -started, and in some cases 
throttled, whereas  solid motors can only be used once. The highest thrust and 
highest specific impulse systems are bipropellant but they are more complex, not 
miniaturized, and are not meant for low thrust applications. Table 7 shows a 
variety of propellants from different systems, including cold gas for comparison.  
Table 7: Comparison table of propellant options, efficiency, and thrust for s mall satellites. 
 
Table 8 show monopropellant and solid systems available for use on small 
spacecraft. It is important to note that, at the time of t his study, virtually no 
bipropellant systems were suitable for small spacecraft. 

--- PAGE 45 ---
34 
Technology 
Name Description Developer TRL Status Figures
Monopropellant 
thruster
GPIM, HAN 
1N - 22 N, 
(AFM315E), 
Isp 250 sec
NASA 
Glenn, Ball 
Aerospace
(USA)
6 
GPIM datasheet, 
Heavy launch 
Falcon 
2015
Monopropellant 
thruster
HPGP, ADN 
1 N, Isp 
(FLP106),    
220 sec
ECAPS, SSC 
Group, 
(Sweden)
6
PRISMA satellite 
demonstration
Monopropellant MR-140, Hydrazine,     Aerojet 7
thruster 1 N, Isp 202 sec (USA) Champs system
Solid rocket STAR 4G, Solid,      257 ATK 7
motor N, Isp 269 sec (USA) Two test, 0 flights
Solid rocket STAR 5A, Solid,      169 ATK 9
motor N, Isp 250 sec (USA) Six tests, 3 flights
Table 8: List of select small satellite chemical propulsion options . 
In recent years, there has been more of a push to move from toxic propellants 
(hydrazine and nitrogen tetroxide) to “greener,” less -toxic propellants such as 
hydrogen peroxide (H 2O2) or nitrous oxide fuel blend (NOFB), and ionic liquids 
such as hydroxyl am monium nitrate (HAN), hydrazinium nit roformate (HNF) and 
ammonium di -nitramide (ADN). One such program for small satellites is NASA 
Glenn’s Green Propellant Infusion Mission (GPIM) using HAN, which plans to fly 
on a SpaceX Falcon Heavy launch in 2015. OHB-Sweden’s PRISMA project has a 
high-performance green propellant ADN 150  kg satellite demonstration called 
Tango.
 
4.2.3 Electric+Propulsion+
Electric propulsion systems produce thrust generally by producing p lasma and 
accelerating it electro magnetically out of the  thruster. The plasma can be 
produced through various discharge mechanisms such as with electrodes or 
antennas, and can use a variety of propellants ranging from solids to gasses. The 
advantage of an electrical propulsion system over chemical propulsion sy stems 
is that the propellant is separated from the power source (typically solar 

--- PAGE 46 ---
 
 
35 
 
phot
ovoltaic arrays) and as such the thruster is not limited by the energy of a 
chemical reaction. Plasma thrusters are capable of high specific impulse and long 
burn durations, thus allowing for high delta -V maneuvers.  
Electric propulsion systems have a long flight heritage on satellites, with  
hundreds of ion thrusters and H all effect thrusters being flown since the 1970s. 
Similarly to chemical thrusters, miniaturized plasma thrusters for small satellites 
are a relatively new technology and development is currently underway. 
Nevertheless, there are pulsed plasma thrusters (PPT) that have flown on 
missions, and should be considered SoA.  
Pulsed plasma thrusters produce plasma by  ablating solid Teflon with an arc 
discharge across electrodes. The plasma is then accelerated electromagnetically 
to produce thrust. Busek Company, Inc., has developed the Micro Propulsion 
Attitude Control System (MPACS, see Figure 12), which has flown on the Air 
Force Academy CubeSat FalconSat-3. MPACS provided attitude control for the 
CubeSat with 80 µNs impulse bits at 830 sec Isp. Aerojet  also has a similar EO -1 
PPT that flew on NM EO -1, and the thruster has similar specifications (650 -1400 
sec Isp, 90-860 µNs impulse bit, at 5 kg thruster mass).  
 
Figure 12: Busek MPACS (Busek datasheet) . 

--- PAGE 47 ---
 
 
36
 
 
4.3 On+the+Horizon+
4.3.1+Chemical+Propulsion+
Monopropellant hydrazine thrusters have a long heritage as ADCS thrusters 
since as early as 1966 (Mueller , et al. , 2008). Recently JPL has developed a 
CubeSat scale hydrazine thruster, the Hydrazine Milli -Newton Thruster shown 
below in Figure 13, capable of 150 sec Isp and 129 mN thrust at 40  g of thruster 
mass and 8 cm 3 volume. The power requirements of the thruster are low at an 
instantaneous 8 W for valve opening and a continuous 1  W during the burn.  
 
Figure 13: JPL hydrazine Milli-Newton thrusters (Mueller, et al., 2008). 
Another group researching green propellants at Austrian Research Centres 
Seibersdoorf (ARCS) is using hydrogen peroxide as their monopropellant, a fuel 
which has an equivalently long flight heritage (1960’s) as hydrazine. 
Scharlemann, et al., 2011. at ARCS have demonstrated their Miniature Hydrogen 
Peroxide Thruster ( Figure 14) as  capable of 100 -800 mN at 153 sec Isp. The 
power requirement is higher for heating the catalyst bed, around a continuous 10 
W. 

--- PAGE 48 ---
 
 
37
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 14: Miniature hydrogen peroxide thruster (Scharlemann, et al., 2011.). 
Bipropellants offer the capability of higher specific impulse than 
monopropellants, with the disadvantage of requiring separate storage tanks for 
oxidizer and fuel. Tethers Unlimited overcomes this challenge with  their Hydros 
thruster (Figure 15) by storing the hydrogen and oxygen propellants as water, 
and then generates them into gaseous form through electrolysis. They have so 
far demonstrated 0.8 N of thrust at 300 sec Isp. Bipropellant thrusters, as with 
previously mentioned chemical propulsion technologies, have a long flight 
heritage on large satellites and are in development for small sate llites. 
Figure 15: Hydros thruster (Tethers Unlimited datasheet) . 

--- PAGE 49 ---
 
 
38
 
 
4.3.2+Electric+Propulsion+
As there currently are numerous electric propulsion technologies being 
developed for small satellites, this section will be limited to a  selection of several 
different candidates.  These include vacuum arc, hall  effect, gridded ion, 
electrospray, and helicon thrusters —a ll of which are at various TRL designations 
of 5 or below.  
NASA JPL is developing a vacuum arc thruster (see Figure 16) that creates plasma 
from an arc discharge between two solid electrodes. The plasma then expands 
and accelerates out of a magnetic nozzle, creating thrus t. The laboratory 
demonstrated specifications are 125 µN thrust and 1500 sec Isp at 40  g mass and 
10 W power. The plasma emitted from the thruster is quasi -neutral and thus 
does not require a neutralizer to prevent spacecraft charging . 
 
Figure 16: JPL vacuum arc thrusters (Mueller, et al., 2008). 
Princeton Plasma Physics Laborato ry is developing a cylindrical H all thruster 
(Figure 17) capable of 3 -6 mN and 1200- 2000 sec Isp at 50- 170 W power and < 1 
kg mass. The H all thruster forms plasma by electron bombardment of a neutral 
gas, and the resulting ions are accelerated out of the chamber due to an 
electrostatic potential difference. A neutralizer in the form of an electron-
emitting cathode is required in order to prevent spacecraft charging, and the 
miniaturization of thermionic cathodes has been a challenge facing developers.  

--- PAGE 50 ---
 
 
39
 
 
 
 
Figure 17: PPPL cylindrical Hall thruster (Mueller et al., 2008). 
JPL is also producing a RF plasma discharge gridded ion thruster called the 
Miniature Xenon Ion Thruster (MiXI , shown in Figure 18). MiXI is capable of 1.5 
mN thrust and 3200 sec Isp, uses 50 W of power and has a  mass of 200 g. The 
plasma in RF discharge is formed by accelerating electrons in an oscillating 
electromagnetic field and causing ionization upon  neutral particle bombardment. 
The ions are then accelerated out of the thruster via electrostatic potential grids, 
and thus a neutralizer is also required.  
Figure 18: JPL Miniature Xenon Ion thruster (Mueller, et al., 2008). 
Electrospray thrusters function by electrostatically accelerating charged liquid 
particles, usually from a volatile ionic liquid, and thus do not require any 
mechanism to form a plasma discharge. Th ese are beneficial and much more 
efficient than miniature pla sma thrusters. Busek Corporation has also developed 
an electrospray thruster (Figure 19) with specifications of 1 mN thrust and 400 – 

--- PAGE 51 ---
 
 
40
 
 
1300 
sec Isp, while consuming 8.5 x 8.5 x 6 cm and 10 W power. The electrospray 
thruster also requires a neutralizer to prevent spacecraft charging and spacecraft 
contamination. 
 
Figure 19: Busek PUC electrospray thruster. 
Two new plasma thru sters being developed are the CubeSat Ambipolar Thruster 
(CAT, Figure 20) at University of Michigan and the mini Heated Helicon Thruster 
(mH2T) at Stanford University. Both thrusters form plasma with a radiofrequency 
discharge in an axial magnetic field specifically to develop a helicon wave within 
the plasma— this has been shown to efficiently produce high -density, low-
pressure plasma. CAT then accelera tes the plasma out of a magnetic nozzle via 
an ambipolar electric field. CAT is predicted to produce 1 mN thrust at 2000 sec 
Isp while consuming 10 W of power. mH2T further heats the electrons after 
ionization before accelerating the plasma similarly out o f a magnetic nozzle. 
This is predicted to produce 1.5 mN thrust at 3000 sec Isp while consuming 50 W 
power. 

--- PAGE 52 ---
 
 
41
 
 
 
 
Figure 20: CubeSat Ambipolar Thruster (Longmier, 2013) . 
4.3.3 Solar+Sails+
Solar sails offer a propellant -less option for satellites by harnessing momentum 
of the solar flux with reflective sails. This is an attractive alternative that also 
complies with the CubeSat standard prohibiting the use of high pressure storage 
tanks. University of Surrey in the United Kingdom is developing a 3 kg solar sail 
CubeSat called CubeSail (Figure 21), with a sail surface area of 5  x 5 m. 
Figure 21: Engineering and CAD models of CubeSail (Lappas , et al., 2011). 
Table 9 shows a summary of the small satellite propulsion technologies listed 
above. Although t his subsection has focused primarily on CubeSat technologies, 
similar technologies are being developed globally for 50 -180 kg class small 
spacecraft. One such mission is NASA’s Sunjammer solar sail.  The 180 kg sail 
module is scheduled for launch in 2015.  This mission builds on the NanoSail -D2 
demonstration on a 3U CubeSat. 

--- PAGE 53 ---
42 
 
 
 Table 9: 
Technology DescriptionName
List of small satellite 
Developer
propulsion technologies. 
TRL Status Figures
MPACS
Pulsed plasma 
thruster flown on 
FalconSat-3
Busek Corp
 (USA)
9
Flight tested
Miniature 
hydrogen 
peroxide 
thruster
Green 
monopropellant 
thruster using 
hydrogen peroxide
ARCS 
(Austria)
4
Component laboratory 
testing
Hydros thruster
Oxygen and hydrogen 
bipropellant chemical 
thruster, propellant 
stored as water
Tethers 
Unlimited 
(USA)
4
Component laboratory 
testing
JPL hydrazine 
milli-newton 
thruster
Hydrazine 
monopropellant 
thruster
JPL
(USA)
3
Proof of concept, 
laboratory development
Vacuum arc 
thruster
Pulsed plasma 
thruster that erodes 
its cathode via an arc 
to produce propellant
JPL
(USA)
4
Component laboratory 
testing
Cylindrical hall 
thruster
Miniature Hall effect 
thruster using a 
cylindrical (instead of 
anular) geometry
Princeton 
(USA)
4
Component laboratory 
testing
Miniature 
xenon ion 
thruster
RF discharge gridded 
ion thruster
JPL
(USA)
3
Proof of concept, 
laboratory development
PUC 
electrospray 
thruster
Electrostatically 
accelerates charged 
liquid particles from 
an ionic liquid
Busek Corp.
 (USA)
5
Subsystem laboratory 
testing
CAT
Thruster with a 
helicon plasma 
discharge accelerated 
out of a magnetic 
nozzle
University 
of Michigan 
(USA)
3
Proof of concept, 
laboratory development
mH2T
Thruster with a 
helicon plasma 
discharge with 
electron heating stage 
and magnetic nozzle
Stanford 
University 
(USA)
2
Technology concept 
and application 
formulated
CubeSail 25 square meter 
CubeSat solar sail
University 
of Surrey 
(UK)
3
Proof of concept, 
laboratory development
Sunjammer
1200 square meter 
Kapton solar sail 
module
NASA L'Garde
(USA)
5
Schedule for 
2015
launch 


--- PAGE 54 ---
 
 
43 
 
4.4 Conclusion+
Small spacecraft propulsion is a slightly primitive, but rapidly growing 
technology field. The SoA in this field consists of cold gas thrusters, solid rocket 
motors, and pulsed plasma thrusters. There are upcoming demonstrations in 
green monopropellant sys tems. The future of propulsion technology  is diverse 
with both chemical and electric propulsion options on track to mature within the 
next five years . A summary of the performance of these technologies is detailed 
graphically below in  Figure 22. 
 
 
 
Figure 22: Plot detailing the spectrum of small satellite propulsion options . 
4.5 References+
B. W. Longmier: PEPL Thrusters: CubeSat Ambipolar Thruster. May 2013.  
Busek Co, Inc.: Busek Electrospray. [Online], 2013. Available at: 
http://www.busek.com/technologies__espray.htm  [Accessed August 2013].  
CubeSat Design Specification (CDS) . Revision 13, California Polytechnic State 
University, San Luis Obispo, CA, April 2013.  

--- PAGE 55 ---
 
 
44
 
 
CubeSat Technology: Current SoA and Future Needs . Jet Propulsion Laboratory  
Hruby, Vlad, Busek Corp. : High Isp CubeSat Propulsion.  iCubeSat Conference at 
MIT, 2012. 
Lappas, Vaios, et al.: CubeSail: A low cost CubeSat based solar sail demonstration 
mission. Advances in Space Research  48.11, 1890-1901, 2011. 
Mueller, J. et al.: A survey of micro -thrust propulsion options for microspacecraft 
and formation flying missions.  5th Annual CubeSat Developers Workshop . San 
Luis Obispo, CA, 2008. 
Mueller, J., Hofer, R. and Ziemer, J. Survey of propulsion technologies applicable to 
CubeSats. 2010. 
Tethers Unlimited, Inc. : Hydros, Powerful Propulsion and Precision Pointing for 
CubeSats. [Online] 2013. Available at: http://www.tethers.com    
          http://pepl.engin.umich.edu/thrusters/CAT.html  
Tajmar1, M . and Scharlemann , C. A.  Development of Electric and Chemical  
Microthrusters. International Journal of Aerospace Engineering , Hindawi 
Publishing Corporation, Volume 2011, Article ID 361215, 1 -10. 2011.  !
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

--- PAGE 56 ---
 
 
45
 
 
5. ATTITUDE DETERMINATION AND CONTROL SYSTEM 
5.1 Introduction+
The SoA of ADCS for small spacecraft relies on miniaturizing technology without 
significant degradation of performance. Despite the fact that ADCS algorithms 
used on small spacecraft are essentially the same as  those flown on conventional 
spacecraft, small spacec raft are good platforms to test new algorithms and 
advanced software. Benefit s of using small spacecraft include  low cost and rapid 
development; research to decrease the development cost of ADCS software is 
addressed below.  
5.2 State+of+the+Art!+
5.2.1+Reaction+Wheels++
The performance of reaction wheels is described by maximum angular 
momentum, maximum output torque , electrical power, and the level of micro -
vibrations produced by the wheels. Current research focuses on increasing 
angular momentum and maximum output torque, and decreasing electrical 
power and micro -vibrations. For CubeSats, which may not have sufficient volume  
to accommodate three independent wheels, integrated three- axis wheel systems 
are considered a SoA option4.  
Wheel performance, in terms of maximum angular momentum and output 
torque, is proportional to wheel volume (Larson & Wertz, 2004). One convenient 
way of describing the SoA of wheels is by mapping the ratio of maximum angular 
momentum to volume against the mass of the wheel, as depict ed in Figure 23. 
The Figure gives  an overview of the current SoA techniques  by comparing a 
number of benchmark wheels presented in detail in  Table 10. 
 
 
                                            
4
 Traditionally CubeSats did not require precise attitude stability and micro -vibrations have not 
been considered problem atic for these spacecraft , b ut recent CubeSat missions require more 
precise observations, and thus recent miniature wheel research focuses both on improved pointing, 
and on being able to deal with micro-vibrations. 
!

--- PAGE 57 ---
 
 
46
 
 
 
Figure 23: SoA for small spacecraft ADCS wheels. The performance of nine  wheels, expressed 
through the ratio of maximum angular momentum to volume, is plotted against mass. The 
orange dashed line separates SoA technologies from those still under development. The data 
used to draw the graph is given in  Table 10.  
 
  
10002000
Maximum Angular Momentum / Volume [Nms/mm^3]
Mass[g]
1000
100
10
TRL$≤$6
SoA$Wheels
(TRL$≥$7)
400 600 800


--- PAGE 58 ---
47 
Table10: Examples of SoA wheel technology for small spacecraft . 
Technology Description Developer TRL Status FiguresName
SoA  single axis wheel 
for minisatellite 9(Max AM = 1500 SSTL100SP-O TechDemoSat-1 mNms, (UK) KazakhstanMax torque =110 
mNm)
9
SoA  single axis  wheel UK-DMC-2, 
for microsatellite SSTL  Deimos-1,  10SP-M (Max AM = 420 mNms, (UK) NigeriaSat-2, 
Max torque =11 mNm) & ExactView-1
SoA  single axis wheel Astro- und for microsatellite 8RW90 Feinwerktechnik(Max AM = 340 mNms, BIRD, TET-1(Germany)Max torque =15 mNm)
SoA  single axis wheel 8for nanosatellite Sinclair RW-0.03-4 UniBRITE (Max AM = 30 mNms, Interplanetary  BRITE-AustriaMax torque =2 mNm)
SoA three axis 
integrated miniature 
wheel for cubesat Maryland 7MAI-200 (Max AM = 10.8 mNms, Aerospace QbX1, QbX2 
Max torque =0.63 
mNm)
SoA  single axis 
miniature wheel for Astro- und cubesat 7RW1 Feinwerktechnik(Max AM = 0.6 mNms, BEESAT(Germany)Max torque =0.02 
mNm)
5.2.2+Magnetorquer+
The purpose of magnetorquers  is to develop a magnetic field that interfaces with 
Earth’s magnetic field so that the counter- forces produced provide useful torque. 
Whereas large spacecraft usually do not rely on magnetorquers (their size would 

--- PAGE 59 ---
 
 
48 
 
Technology 
Name Description Developer TRL Status Figures
The most popular 
Magnetorquer
magnetorquer for  
micro satellites to 
mini satellites 
(with/without 
ZARM
(Germany)
9
Numerous flight 
demonstrations
redundancy)
The most popular 
Magnetorquer
magnetorquer for 
pico satellites to nano 
satellites 
(with/without 
ZARM
(Germany)
9
Numerous flight 
demonstrations
redundancy)
SSBV 
Aerospace 9!
Magnetorquer Magnetorquer with & Flight heritage on the 
rod redundancy Technology BADR B, Fedsat and 
 Group MicroLabSat
(UK)
be prohibitive), magnetorquers for small spacecraft are built around two types of 
technology: air core coils  and metal core coils (also known as ‘torque rods’). The 
performance of metal core coil magnetorquers depends on the material used: 
materials with high magnetic permeability  allow higher ma gnetic moment; m ini- 
and micro satellites are adapted to having a redundant coil inside their 
magnetorquer in case of contingency. Table 11 gives an overview of some SoA 
technology for magnetorquers.  
Table 11: Examples of the SoA of magnetorquer technology  for small spacecraft. 
 
5.2.3 Other+Actuators+
For active , high -agility missions such as side -looking slew maneuvers in Earth 
observation, gamma ray burst observation, or observation of asteroid fly -by’s, 
higher output torque actuators are required. In these cases, Control Moment 
Gyros (CMGs) are usually the technology of choice.  
 
Technologies for passive attitude stabilization using the ambient  space 
environment include aerodynamic wing technologies (taking advantage of 


==================================================
SECTION: In-Space Propulsion (Pages 60-139)
==================================================

--- PAGE 60 ---
 
 
49 
 
Technology Description Developer TRL Status FiguresName
CMG used in SSTL's SSTL 8CMG satellites (UK) Flown on BILSAT-1
Aerodynamic Pum pkin’s Colony I Pum pkin 7
wing CubeSat Bus
 
(USA) Flown on QbX
atmospheric drag), g ravity gradient  stabilization, and  p ermanent magnets for 
magnetic field aligned control. 
These technologies are mostly used with active control actuators or rate dampers 
(see Table 12).  
 
Table 12: Examples of the SoA of other actuators for small spacecraft. 
5.2.4+Star+Trackers+
Currently, star trackers are the most important attitude sensor for small 
spacecraft. The performance of star trackers is measured by accuracy, data 
output rate, first track ing time, and maximum allowable slew rate (attitude 
maneuver rate). The accuracy of a star tracker is proportional to the size of its 
field of view. Figure 24 maps the in -plane accuracy of a number of benchmark 
star trackers against their mass and power requirements. A subset of the data 
used is given in Table 13. 

--- PAGE 61 ---
50 
Technology 
Name Description Developer TRL Status Figures
µASC (Micro 
Advanced 
Stellar 
Compass)
World's highest 
accuracy star tracker 
for mini satellites
(accuracy=1 arcsec)
Technical 
University 
of 
Denmark 
(DTU)
Proba 
9
series, Myriade 
series
Miniature star tracker VECTRONIC 9
VST-41M for micro satellites  Aerospace TUBSAT series, SDS 
(accuracy=18 arcsec) (Germany) series
Figure 24: SoA of small spacecraft sta r trackers. The performance of eight  star trackers, 
expressed through the accuracy achievable, is plotted against mass and power requirements. 
The blue surface highlights the SoA technology at TRL higher than 7, and the red surface 
highlights technology at TRL lower or equal to 6. A subset o f the data used to draw the graph is 
given in Table 13. 
Table 13: Examples of SoA star trackers  for small spacecraft. 
Mass[g]
Accuracy [deg]
1000
100
10
0.001 0.01
ST#16#28
ST200
Altair#HB+
DTU4STT
VST#41M
10 1001
VF#ST
Accuracy [arcsec]
TRL'≤'6
SoA'STT
(TRL'≥'7)
STELLA
Power[W]
10
1
0.1
BCT4Nano

--- PAGE 62 ---
 
 
51 
 
Technology 
Name Description Developer TRL Status Figures
SS-411 Digital 
Sun Sensor
World's best seller 
micro DSS
(accuracy=0.1°)
Sinclair 
Interplanetary
(Canada)
9
µDSS
2-D APS (Active Pixel 
Sensor) detector array 
DSS
(accuracy=0.1°)
TNO
(Netherlands)
7
PROBA-2, Delfi-
n3Xt(2013)
5.2.5+Sun+Sensors+
There are two types of Sun sensors for small spacecraft : fine- or medium -
precision Sun sensors and coarse Sun sensors. Traditionally, fine-precision Sun 
sensors have combined two orthogonally arranged solar cells with narrow slits 
over the cell s, and measured the analog current from the cells to detect the 
direction of the Sun. More recently, fine -precision sensors use two line array 
sensors or an area sensor to obtain a digital value for the Sun’s direction. Coarse 
Sun sensors basically consist of a solar cell or a photo diode. Currently the most 
advanced Sun  sensor technology for small spacecraft is the SS -411 from Sinclair 
Interplanetary, as shown in Table 14.  
Table 14: Examples of SoA fine -precision Sun sensors. 
 
5.2.6+Earth+Sensors+
Most recent miniature Earth sensors use thermopile sensors or photodiodes to 
locate the curve of the Earth wi thout the use of scanning mechanisms. Since the 
temperature of the Earth’s contour differs significantly between polar regions 
and the equator, a set of thermopile arrays measures both the temperature of the 
limb of the Earth  and space, and a CPU calculate s the difference to determine the 
displacement from nadir. The process is illustrated in  Figure 25, with an example 
of current TRL in Table 15.  

--- PAGE 63 ---
52 
Technology 
Name Description Developer TRL Status Figures
Earth nadir 
sensor
SoA miniature 
European Space 
Agency for cubesat
Aerospace
(USA)
7
PSSCT-2
 
Figure 25: The use of thermopiles to detect the limb of the Earth has enabled Earth sensors to 
be miniaturized. 
Table 15: An Example of a SoA Earth sensor for small spacecraft . 
5.2.7+Angular+Rate+Sensors+
Gyroscopes can be ranked as follows, in decreasing order of precision and 
system resource requirements: mechanical and ring laser gyroscopes, fiber 
optical gyroscopes, and MEMS vibrating structure gyroscopes. Microsatellites 
tend to use fiber optical gyrosc opes, while nano - and picosatellites generally use 
MEMS-based gyroscopes. The precision of gyroscopes is measured by bias 
instability and angle random walk. Figure 26 shows an overview of the SoA 
gyroscopic technology available to small spacecraft by mappi ng system resource 
requirements against precision. Note that the values for power and mass need to 
be multiplied by three if the angular rate is required to be measured along the 

--- PAGE 64 ---
 
 
53
 
 
Technology 
Name Description Developer TRL Status Figures
µFORCE-1
Single axis fiber 
optical gyro
for mini satellites
(BI=1deg/h)
Northrop 
Grumman 
LITEF GmbH
(USA/ 
Germany)
9
VSGA
3-axis MEMS gyro 
using CRS09 for 
mincrosatellites
(BI=3deg/h)
AES
(Japan) Flown 
7
on SDS-4
ADIS16405BLM
Triaxial inertial sensor
with magnetometer 
for nano and pico 
satellites
(BI=25.2deg/h)
Analog 
Devices
(USA)
8
three axes of the spacecraft. Some of the raw data used in Figure 26 is specified 
in Table 16. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure
 26: SoA of gyroscopic technology for small spacecraft. System resource requirements 
are mapped against precision . 
Table 16: Examples of SoA gyroscopes for small spacecraft . 
Mechanical, Ring Laser Gyro
Fiber Optical Gyro
MEMS Gyro
15 150 15001.50.150.0150.00150.00015
Bias Instability [deg/s]
Mass[g]
1000
100
10
1
0.1
Power[W]
10
1
0.1
0.01
TRL$≤$6
SoA$MEMS$Gyros
(TRL$≥$7)


--- PAGE 65 ---
 
 
54 
 
Technology 
Name Description Developer TRL Status Figures
SGR-10
Higher-end GPS receiver
(L1, 2 antennas,24ch, 
10m)
SSTL
(UK) Flown on 
9
NigeriaSat-2
GPS-12-V1 (L1, 
GPS receiver
1 antenna,12ch, 
10m)
SpaceQuest
(USA) Flown on 
9
AprizeSat-1,-2
SGR-05P
Miniature GPS receiver
(L1, 1 antenna,12ch, 
10m)
SSTL
(UK) Flown 
8
on UKDMC
Phoenix-S
Miniature and higher 
performance GPSR 
with Kalman filter 
inside
(L1,1antenna,12ch, 10m) 
DLR
(Germany)
9
Flown onPROBA-2, X-Sat, 
PRISMA, FLP, & ARGO
OEM4-G2L
Dual frequency GPSR
(L1/L2,1antenna,12+12c
h, 1.5m)
NOVATEL
(Canada)
7
Flown on CanX-2 
CASSIOPE
& 
5.2.8+GPS+Receivers+and+Antennas+
GPS receivers are used not only for orbit control but also for ADCS purposes, in 
particular to determine of the direction of a ground target. The best way to make 
GPS receivers smaller is to develop high -end Application Specific Integrated 
Circuits (ASIC). Examples of these current technologies are listed in Table 17. In 
order to use COTS GPS receivers in space, the Doppler frequency range and the 
ionospheric delay correction must be modified accordingly. To do so, developers 
must have access to t he firmware of the receiver.  
Table 17: Example SoA GPS receivers for small spacecraft. 

--- PAGE 66 ---
 
 
55 
 
 
Technology 
Name Description Developer TRL Status Figures
Single axis wheel for 
Type SSS
microsatellite
(Max AM=400mNms, 
Max AM/V = 1102 
 
Mitubishi 
Precision
(Japan) Not 
6
flown yet
Nms/m^3)
Single axis wheel for 
RW-0.060
nanosatellite
(Max AM=60mNms,  
Max AM/V = 324 
Sinclair 
Interplanetary
(Canada) Not 
6
flown yet
Nms/m^3)
Single axis miniature 
Micro reaction 
wheel
wheel for cubesat
(Max AM=18mNms,  
Max AM/V = 541 
Blue Canyon 
Technologies
(USA) Not 
6
flown yet
Nms/m^3)
5.3 On+the+Horizon++
5.3.1+Reaction+Wheels+
Table 18 presents a number of wheel technologies currently under development.  
Table 18: On the horizon technologies for small spacecraft  wheels. 
 
5.3.2+Magnetorquer++
Three-axis integrated magnetorquer  systems for nano - and picosatellites are in 
development, as shown in Table 19. 

--- PAGE 67 ---
56 
Technology 
Name Description Developer TRL Status Figures
TU Delft µMTQ 
Sytem
Three axis integrated 
magnetorquer system
Delft 
University
(Netherlands)
5
DELFI-N3XT
The ISIS 
ISIS MagneTorQuer (iMTQ) ISIS 5
Magnetorquer is a PCB based 3-axis (Netherlands) Not flown yet
magnetorquer system
Table 19: Examples of future magnetorquer technology for small space craft. 
5.3.3+Other+Actuators+
Research focuses on CMGs and aerodynamic wings for CubeSats. For missions 
beyond-GEO and near -Earth environment, magnetorquers such as thrusters and 
electrochromic vanes  for solar pressure  control cannot be used. However, all are 
promising technologies as shown in Table 20. 
Table 20: Examples of future technologies for o ther actuators for small spacecraft . 
Technology 
 Name Description Developer TRL Status Figures
 
CMG
 
 
CMG for 
microsatellite
Tamagawa 
Seiki
(Japan)
6
Demonstrated on 
TSUBAME
 Electrochromic 
vanes for solar 
pressure  control
Electrochromic vanes 
for solar pressure 
control
JPL
(USA) 4
 
5.3.4+Star+Trackers++
Areas of research include fast and effective star identification algorithms, and 
low-reflection small (or deployable) baffles, as shown in Table 21. 

--- PAGE 68 ---
57 
Table 21: On the horizon technologi es of star trackers for small spacecraft. 
Technology 
 Name Description Developer TRL Status Figures
 
BCT Nano 
Tracker
 
CubeSat compatible 
star tracker with 
digital interface drive 
electronics
(accuracy=6 arcsec)
Blue Canyon 
Technologies 
(BCT)
(USA)
6
To be flown on JPL's 
INSPIRE 3U CubeSat, 
planned for launch 2014-
2016
 
 ST-16 Star 
Tracker
Miniature star tracker
(accuracy=7 arcsec)
Sinclair 
Interplanetary
(Canada)
6
17 Flight units 
delivered. First launch 
Q4 2013
 
The ST-200 is one of  
the world’s smallest Berlin Space 
 Star 
 
Tracker 
200
ST- autonomous star 
trackers for CubeSats 
and other nano 
satellite missions
Technologies 
(BST)
(Germany)
Not 
5
flown yet
(accuracy=30 arcsec) 
 The ST-100 is a low-
 Star 
 
Tracker 
100
ST-
cost star tracker for 
micro and nano 
satellites which allows 
tracking of magnitude 
6 stars with an update 
rate of 5Hz
Berlin Space 
Technologies 
(BST)
(Germany)
6
Flying on LAPAN-A2 and 
LAPAN-ORARI 
microsatellites, 
launching mid-2013
(accuracy=30 arcsec)
 
5.3.5+Sun+Sensors+
Research is ongoing as can be noted from  
Table 22. 
Technology 
Name Description Developer TRL Status Figures
SSBV 6
Miniature 
CubeSat Sun 
Sensor
Fine sun sensor for 
cubesats
Aerospace & 
Technology 
Group
(Netherlands/ 
To be flown on Ukube-1 
and TechDemoSat-1 
(a.k.a. TDS-1), both of 
which are launching in 
UK) Sep. 2013

--- PAGE 69 ---
 
 
58 
 
Technology 
Name Description Developer TRL Status Figures
MESA Wide FOV ESA for 
nanosatellite
Meisei 
Electric
(Japan)
6
Not flown yet
(planned in 2013 
SOCRATES)
on 
 
Technology 
Name Description Developer TRL Status Figures
STIM300 3-axis MEMS gyro 
(BI=0.5°/h)
Sensonor
(Norway) Not 
5
flown yet
CRS39 Single axis MEMS 
(BI=0.2°/h)
gyro Silicon 
sensing
(UK) Not 
5
flown yet
SAR500 Single axis MEMS 
(BI=0.02°/h)
gyro Sensonor 
(Norway) Not 
5
flown yet
5.3.6+Earth+Sensors++
Table 23 shows an example of an Earth sensor for small spacecraft currently 
under development.  
Table 23: Example of an Earth sensor for small spacecraft under development.  
5.3.7+Angular+Rate+Sensors+
 Recent R&D has enabled MEMS gyros to be on par with fiber optic solutions in 
terms of precision. As shown in Table 24, a number of microsatellites have 
already adopted MEMS gyros. MEMS gyros are small, lightweight, low power, and 
fit the needs of small spacecraft.  
Table 24: Examples of gyroscopes under development  for small spacecraft. 

--- PAGE 70 ---
 
 
59 
 
5.3.8+GPS+Receivers++
Current research areas that look to be advantageous are: multi -antenna inputs, 
multi-Global Navigation Spacecraft Systems (GNSS) decoders, L1/L2 dual -
frequencies, internal Kalman fi ltering (only very few GPS receivers for small 
spacecraft currently have an internal Kalman filter) , GPS constellation spacecraft 
initial acquisition & search algorithms, precise positioning using carrier -wave 
phase information, and open source software GPS receivers. An example of this 
is the FOTON subsystem under development by University of Texas, Austin (as 
shown in Table 25).  
Table 25: Example of a GPS receiver under development  for small spacecraft. 
Technology 
 Name Description Developer TRL Status Figures
Dual frequency, open 
 
 
source GPSR with University 
FOTON Kalman filter inside
(L1/L2,2 
of Texas 
Austin 6
antennas,12+12ch, (USA)
1.5m)
Table 25A: ADCS accuracies achievable for mini -, micro-, nano- and picosatellites. The overall 
accuracy is the root mean squared value of the three preceding values.  
Attitude Ground Target Attitude Overall 
Determination Position Control Accuracy
Mini/Microsatellites
Nano/Picosatellites
 
~0.1
~0.01
~0.8
~0.01
~1.8
~0.04
~2
~0.1
5.3.9+Reaction+Control+System+Thrusters+++
No small spacecraft in LEO have used RCS thrusters in past missions. Currently, 
there are only limited efforts goi ng in this direction. An example of a current 
project is the STRaND -2 mission by SSTL developing a cold gas thruster based 
RCS for nanosatellite rendezvous and docking. A large number of thrusters have 
been developed for small spacecraft but all of these s ystems have been built for 
the purpose of orbit correction and not for attitude control. The reason s for this 
lack of development are the limitations in size, mass and power of small 
spacecraft. In LEO, magnetorquers are typically used to unload angular 
momentum and no RCS thrusters are necessary.   

--- PAGE 71 ---
 
 
60 
 
The situation changes for interplanetary missions beyond Earth orbit. 
Magnetorquers cannot be used any more since Earth’s magnetic field is not 
available to provide the torque. There is a need to develop RCS thru sters for 
interplanetary missions. Cold gas thrusters are t he most likely candidate 
technology since chemical thrusters are too complex to mount on small 
platforms. Electric thrusters are not a likely option either since the net thrust 
force of such system s is not sufficient for RCS purposes. Electric systems also 
require significant power that is usually not available for typical small spacecraft.  
5.4 Conclusion+
Pointing accuracy depends on attitude determination error, ground target error, 
and a ttitude control error. Errors can furthermore be categorized into random 
errors, bias (offset) errors, and transitional errors. Figure 27 gives an overview of 
the SoA of pointing accuracy technology for small spacecraft. Most mini- and 
microsatellites are Earth orbiting spacecraft and the attitude control req uirement 
is typically 0.1° (see Table 26).  
 
 
 

--- PAGE 72 ---
 
 
61
 
 
 
0.001
0.01
0.1
1
10
100
2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014
Year
100(180kg 10(100kg (10kg
Astronomy
Reconnaissance
Earth'science''
RF'/'Communication
SSTL(150SSTL(150
SSTL(100JAXA
Myriade
Myriade
Myriade
DLR
SSTL
TUB
Astro200 Astro200
ProbaProba
Proba
SSTL(100
Can(X2
QbX
JAXA MIT
TUDelft
CXBN
Sich
Myriade
Falconsat
Pointing'accuracy'[deg]
Figure 27: Pointing accuracy of spacecraft below 180 kg as a function of time. The two arrows 
depict the trend through the last decade for mini/microsatellites and nano/ picosatellites. The 
SoA is 0.1⁰ for mini/micro and 2⁰ for nano/pico, respectively. The requirement for typical small 
spacecraft EO missions is o n the order of 0.1⁰. Higher accuracy below 0.1 ⁰ can be achieved 
using a mission related sensor (i.e., a payload instrument) in the attitude control loop. CubeSats 
are part of the nano- and picosat category. Their pointing accuracy has improved rapidly 
thanks to miniaturized ADCS components. The data used to plot the graph is shown in Table 
26. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 73 ---
 
 
62 
 
Technology 
Name Description Developer TRL Status Figures
SSTL150 bus
ADCS system level 
SoA  for 150-180 kg 
satellites
(Pointing accuracy =
0.1°)
 
SSTL
(UK)
9
Flown on Beijing-1 
RapidEye
& 
Astro200 bus
ADCS system level 
SoA  for 150-180 kg 
satellites
(Pointing accuracy = 
0.1°)
Comtech 
AeroAstro
(USA)
Flown 
9
on STPSat-1 
STPSat-2
& 
Myriade bus 
(Astrosat-100)
ADCS system level 
SoA  for 150-180 kg 
satellites
(Pointing accuracy = 
0.1°)
CNES / 
Astrium
(France)
9
Flown on Parasol, 
Demeter & Picard
Proba bus
ADCS system level 
SoA  for 100-150 kg 
satellites
(pointing accuracy = 
0.02°)
ESA / 
QinetiQ
(UK)
Flown 
9
on PROBA-2 
PROBA-V
& 
SSTL100 bus
ADCS system level 
SoA  for 50-100 kg 
satellites
(pointing accuracy = 
0.5°)
SSTL
(UK)
9
Flown on Alsat 
NigeriaSat-X
& 
SDS bus
ADCS system level 
SoA  for 10-50 kg 
satellites
(pointing accuracy = 
0.5°)
JAXA
(Japan) Flown 
8
on SDS-4
Cubesat bus
ADCS system level 
SoA  for  less than 
10kg satellites
(pointing accuracy = 
2.0°)
Morehead 
State 
University
(USA)
Flown 
7
on CXBN
Table 26: Examples of the SoAs for small spacecraft with improved pointing accuracy   

--- PAGE 74 ---
 
 
63 
 
Table 27 shows design approaches for achieving higher pointing accuracy. Most 
of the current research in ADCS can be  related to the steps denoted. The SoA 
design level for nano - and picosatellites deals mostly with Steps 1 to 3 and is 
highlighted in italics. The development of miniature star trackers and miniature 
wheels is especially important. For micro - and minisatel lites, the design level can 
go up to Step 14. End -to-end in-orbit calibrations and systematic micro -vibration 
management are an area of importance  here. 
Table 27: Design strategies and approaches in order to achieve higher pointing accuracy for 
small spacecraft. The steps highlighted in italics show the current SoA for nano - and 
picosatellites (including CubeSats). The ADCS of mini- and microsatellites can be refined to 
include all the design steps presented. 
1. Apply 3-axis control architecture.  
2. Use high accuracy sensors like star trackers.  
3. App
ly filtering (e.g. Kalman filter) to eliminate random errors and to 
estimate bias errors in the attitude determination software.  
Basic 4. Apply transitional error calibration e.g., temperature compensation.  
5. Use a mission related sensor (a payload instrument) in the control 
loop for end-to-end feedback. 
6. Conduct an alignment test on ground to calibrate misalignments 
between ADCS and mission related sensors.  
7. Apply 3-axis zero momentum c ontrol architecture.  
8. Use low micro -vibration wheels, and apply dumping materials to the 
structure. 
9. Design structure and components layout for higher moment of 
inertia for the same size and mass.  
10. Use actuators with a better input frequency response.  
11. Use hig her performance onboard computer to increase control 
frequency. 
Advanced 12. Flexible structure analysis and design.  
13. Apply in-orbit calibration and parameter modification in the attitude 
control software. 
14. Apply highly autonomous fault detection, isolation and 
reconfiguration software for operational  safety. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 75 ---
 
 
64 
 
 
Ther
e are two main ways to address ADCS software development: model -based 
development and open -architecture development.  
In the case of model- based development the ADCS flight software uses an 
overarching model from conceptual design to system level test. At conceptual 
design level, the Matlab and Simulink tools are usually used to model the ADCS. 
The same model, with partia l refinements, is then used in the preliminary and 
critical design phases (where C++ flight code can be generated from Matlab). 
Even during final ADCS flight software testing, the model is used to simulate 
attitude dynamics and to create test cases. Some m erits of applying model -based 
development are overall consistency between design phases, cost savings 
achieved with a  decrease in labor, and rapid development cycles. Proba-V (ESA), 
Myriade (CNES, EADS) and LADEE (NASA ARC) ADCS are examples of current 
software development projects using model -based development.  
Open-architecture development relies on a different philosophy to address  
ADCS software development. This environment enables multi -national and multi -
institutional projects: anybody can join and c ontribute to the development of 
ADCS software modules. The development of proprietary code is avoided. This is 
often the option of choice for ADCS software developed in an academic setting . 
The SoA for small spacecraft ADCS subsystems is based on miniaturizing 
existing technology without performance degradation. Miniaturizations are 
achieved for many technologies. Examples include:  
• new 
imaging devices such as the high resolution CMOS image sensor for 
star trackers, and thermopile sensor for Earth sensors;  
new material s to increase the moment of inertia of wheels, and new 
materials to decrease reflections inside the baffle of star trackers;  
new configurations to miniaturize fine -precision Sun s ensors, and Earth 
sensors; 
new algorithm s to increase the accuracy of GPS receivers, and star 
trackers; and 
new peripheral circuits to increase the accuracy of MEMS gyros.  
• 
• 
• 
• 
 

--- PAGE 76 ---
 
 
65
 
 
5.5 References+
Arnold, S., et. al.: QbX - The CubeSat Experiment. SSC12-XI-4. 
Kyohei A. , et. al.: High-Speed Attitude Control System for Small Spacecraft with 
Micro-CMGs. 27th International Symposium on Space Technology and Science 
(ISTS), Tsukuba, July 5 -10, 2009-d-23, 2009. 
Lappas, V., et. al.: Micro CMGs for Agile Small Spacecraft: Design  and In -Orbit 
Tests. Proceedings of the 6th International ESA Conference on Guidance, 
Navigation and Control Systems . Loutraki, Greece, Oct. 17 -20, 2005. 
Larson, W. J. , Wertz, J. R. : Space Mission Analysis and Design. Microcosm Press, 
3rd ed. El Segundo, C A, 2004. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 77 ---
 
 
66
 
 
6. STRUCTURES, MATERIALS AND MECHANISMS 
6.1 Introduction+
The structure is what holds the different components of the spacecraft together 
and provides the necessary interfaces for each subsystem. The selection of the 
structure depends on the accommodation of the payload devices and circuitry, 
material properties, stab ility, and protection reliability. The structure should 
dually minimize the complexity  of the design and minimize the cost. In addition, 
it must support significant  loads encountered during launch while still providing 
an easily accessible power and data b us. 
Different materials can be used for the construction of the main frame, providing 
desirable protection against radiation as well as taking into account the 
temperature gradient s and the vacuum conditions in s pace. Mechanisms and 
actuators are a key com ponent to guarantee the functionality of various  
subsystems ( a prominent example i s power and the related deployment of solar 
panels). 
6.2 State+of+the+Art+
6.2.1 Structures++
Structures have to meet various needs such as stiffness, stability, low mass, low 
price, ease of manufacture, and ability to support deployable mechanisms. The 
primary frame can be machined out of a single block of material, or it can be 
assembled from separate parts. There is no consensus on the typical structure 
mass for small spacecraft  as many different configurations were represented. 
The assembly techniques differ greatly, however, and use screws to fasten 
separate pieces together still seems to be the most common technique. Computer 
Numerical Controller (CNC) techniques are very efficie nt since they minimize 
material losses and internal stresses during fabrication. Spacecraft developers 
can purchase prefabricated structures or make their own custom design s. 
SSTL, Pumpkin , and Incorporated and Innovative Solutions in Space (ISIS) are the 
most popular commercial vendors  of CubeSat structures. Pumpkin’s designs 
range from 0.5 to 3 U and are based on precision sheet -metal fabrication. They 

--- PAGE 78 ---
 
 
67
 
 
are made of 5052 -H32 aluminum sheet metal  that is hard anodized and alodined 
in order to comply with CubeSat guidelines. An advanced version is fabricated 
from 7075-T6 billet aluminum and is one of the lightest and strongest structures 
available due to the ability to resist both compression and twist forces.  
The CubeSat frame was proposed in 1999 at CalPoly  and Stanford University. The 
typical dimensions for a 1U unit are shown in Figure 28 (CalPoly, 2013).  
 
· 
· 
· 
· 
· 
Figure 28: CubeSat specifications (CalPoly, 2013) . 
ISIS CubeSat structures comply with CubeSat standards. Avionics and payload 
modules are mounted onto the primary load -carrying components. The package 
includes the following components: 
Primary Structure:  
2x side frames, black hard anodised 
Ribs, blank alodined 
2x kill-switch mechanisms 
Supplied with inserted phosphor bronze helicoils 
Fasteners 
Secondary Structure:  

--- PAGE 79 ---
 
 
68
 
 
· 6x
 aluminum shear panels, blank alodined 
M3 threaded rods, M3 hex nuts, M3 bus spacers 
Boards are supported using M3 w ashers 
· 
· 
6.2.2 Custom+Designs+++
Several institutions and universities have created their own spacecraft designs 
(NASA 3U designs) . SwissCube, launched in 2009, was a project undertaken in 
Switzerland that machined an entire block of aluminum by adapting the wire 
electrical discharge machining ( EDM) method. This technique consists of a fast 
series of single electrical discharges that make precision shapes without 
exceeding cutting tool pressure. As a result, SwissCube had a structure of just 95 
g of mass, one of the lightest frames ever produced . 
6.2.3 Materials+
Materials have to be lightweight and conduct electricity, since radiation can 
induce potential charge accumulation in the satellite electronics. Various 
conductive light weight metals are the most commonly used materials for small 
spacecraft structures.  
 
The California Polytechnic State University, San Luis Obispo (CalPoly)  writes a 
yearly report with updated basic standards for CubeSat design and integration. 
In their latest release (CalPoly, 2009), they establish general rules governing 
materials:  
• No  hazardous material shall be used in a CubeSat .  
All CubeSats should comply with the following requirements regarding • 
ou
tgassing: 
o To
tal mass loss shall be less than 0.1%.  
Collected Volatile Condensable Material shall be less than 0.1%.  o 
6.2.3.1 Aluminum!
Aluminum is the most common material of choice in most recent small satellite 
missions. Aluminum offers reliability and lightweight support at low cost. It is 
thermally and electrically conductive, chemically resistant and non -sparking. In 

--- PAGE 80 ---
 
 
69
 
 
terms of strength, aluminum is equal to that of other metals if reinforced at low 
temperatures (University of Texas, 2003). Table 28 and  
Table 29 show the characteristics of a few examples of different aluminum alloys 
used in previous satellite missions.   
Table 28: Aluminum structures used in recent missions. 
Mission Materials Launch Date
EST-1 Aluminum AW 6061-T6 
and AW 7075 2013
Aluminum (AA2024-
PROBA V T3) and Aluminum 2013
(AA7075-T7351
e-St@r Aluminun 5005 H16 2012
Techedsat Aluminum 6061 2012
Hermes Aluminum 7075-T73 2011  
 
Table 29
: Properties of aluminum types. 
 
Aluminum 
Type
Density 
(g/cm^3)
Modulus of 
Elasticity 
(Gpa)
Fatigue 
Strength 
(MPa) 
Ultimate 
Tensile 
Strength 
(MPa)
Thermal 
Conductivity 
(W/m!K)
Electrical 
Resistance 
(ohms!cm)
2024-T3 2.78 73.1 138 483 121 5.82E-06
7075-T73xx 2.81 72 150 505 155 4.30E-06
5005 H16 2.7 69 N/A 180 205 N/A
6061 2.7 68.9 62.1 124 180 3.66E-06
6.2.3.2 Other!Metals!
Titanium has several positive traits, such as resistance to corrosion, a low 
thermal expansion coefficient, and high durability. However, it is very difficult to 
machine and is about 60% heavier than aluminum.  
Steel offers a very low stiffness to density ratio and a large range of strength and 
ductility. It is also extremely h eavy, even more than titanium.  
Beryllium has appeared as a viable option due to its high stiffness to weight ratio 
and high thermal conductivity. It is lighter than aluminum but much more brittle, 

--- PAGE 81 ---
 
 
70 
 
which 
in turn makes it very expensive and time -consuming t o machine.  In 
addition, particles are toxic, driving  manufacturing costs even higher. 
6.2.3.3 Composites!
Composite materials are made of two or more materials with different physical 
and chemical properties. The main advantage of composites is that they can be 
designed for the necessities of the mission. Composites are usually made from a 
matrix material and a reinforcement material . The material used for the matrix is 
usually a cured resin, and it supports the reinforcement materials — usually 
carbon fiber. Cyanate  resin exhibits very convenient performance  characteristics 
for space applications due to low moisture absorption, low microcracking and 
low outgassing (Ozaki, 2008). Composites are anisotropic; hence the properties 
are beneficially different in each part of the material, depending on  the direction 
of the loads. However one potential problem is that  shock forces can separate 
the laminates between layers. Due to various potential outcomes, manufacturing 
is expensive and time consuming.  
Small spacecraft manufacturers are employing composite structures with more 
frequency. For example, SSTL is developing a series of low -cost, multifunctional, 
high-performance, lightweight composite structures of TRL 6 or more. They are 
made from a cyanate -ester and 
epoxy based polymer resin with 
various fiber reinforcements (see 
Figure 29). Another example is 
the NASA ARC Common Bus that 
has been used f or the recent 
LADEE mission.
  
 
 
6.2.3.4 Additive!Manufacturing!
Materials!
 Figure 29: SSTL Composite Structure . 
Additive manufacturing is a layer -by-layer process that uses CAD data to create a 
3D object. Current capabilities using additive manufacturing are:  

--- PAGE 82 ---
 
 
71
 
 
• High strength build materials of nylon/carbon fiber or titanium  
Fully fused construction, which allows for high pressure vessels  
Internal cavities  
• 
• 
Additive manufacturing does have certain limitations:  
• Inadequate material strengths  
Porous construction, which can lead to outgassing  
Non-functional parts/used for fit checks  
• 
• 
Additive manufacturing is recently being used for prototype -building due to 
flexibility in 3D printing technology. Figure 30 shows a list of some of the most 
common materials used in add itive manufacturing of small spacecraft 
components.  
 
Figure 30: List of materials for additive manufacturing (SINTech, 2013) . 
6.2.3.5 Windform!Materials !
CRP Technology, an Italian -based group, is specialized in Laser Sintering (LS) 
technology and is well known for their additive manufacturing materials line 
called Windform XT. Windform XT is a carbon fiber -reinforced composite 
material, of which the proper ties are shown in  

--- PAGE 83 ---
 
 
72
 
 
Table 30 and a visual representation can be seen in Figure 31.  
Table 30: Properties of Windform XT 2.0 . 
 
Material Density 
(g/cm^3)
Elongation 
at Break
Tensile 
Modulus 
(MPa)
 Tensile 
Strength 
(MPa)
Melting Point (°C)
Windform 1.097 3.80% 8928.2 83.84 179.3
Applications of Windform:   
• In October 2011, CRP Technology successfully completed construction of 
a CubeSat built with rapid prototyping and using Windform XT (see Figure 
31).  
 
• 
• 
Figure 31: Satellite skeleton prototyped using Windform material (CRP Technology). 
A 1U CubeSat called PrintSat was 3D printed by the Montana State 
University Space Science and Engineering Laboratory . Once in orbit, 
PrintSat will measure and report on the characteristics of Windform XT2.0. 
The goal is to validate the usefulness of additive manufacturing for 
satellite structures and mechanisms. It will be launched in 2014.  
RApidprototyped MEMS Propulsi on and Radiation Test  (RAMPART) is a 
tech demo satellite which will demonstrate the use of rapid prototyping 
using Windform XT materials to design, build and fly CubeSats (see Figure 
32). The entire structure is made of high phosphorus , electroless nickel 

--- PAGE 84 ---
 
 
73
 
 
plated material to provide radar reflectivity for tracking purposes. Benefits 
of the RAMPART propulsion system are the li ghtweight and specialized 
cell structures of the propellant tank made from Windform XT.  
 
• 
Figure 32: RAMPART satellite (Calpoly, 2010) . 
Experimental Propulsion Lab’s Additively Manufactured Propulsion System 
(AMPS) is at  TRL 6-7 , and has a propulsion system built via additive 
manufacturing technology using Windform XT 2.0 (Dushku, 2012).  
6.2.4 Mechanisms+
Satellite mechanisms include “one shot” devices (such as release mechanisms 
and deployment system s), and continuous operation system s (such as solar array 
drives, momentum wheels and antenna pointing mechanisms). 

--- PAGE 85 ---
 
 
74
 
 
6.
2.4.1 Antenna!Pointing!Mechanisms!(APM) !
Surrey Satellite Technology Ltd's APM, currently at TRL 9, is a low -cost 
mechanism designed to complete the payload downlink chain. This APM is 
expected to advance the downlink Effective Isotropic Radiated Power (EIRP) in the 
order of 13 to 17 dB, compared to a common Isoflux antenna configuration.  
SSTL’s APM comprises the following elements:  
• X - Band antenna & RF harness  
Elevation drive modul e  
Azimuth drive module  
Electronics module  
Associated brackets joining the modules together  
• 
• 
• 
• 
6.2.4.2 Deployment!and!Release! Mechanisms!
CubeSats and small spacecraft are typically launched into space as “piggyback” 
or secondary payloads. For this reason, pyrotech nic release devices are typically 
avoided to minimize the chance of damaging the launcher's primary payload. 
Industry is actively working to develop non -pyrotechnic devices to comply with 
specifications. The following paragraphs show three examples of SoA release 
devices available to small spacecraft.  
6.2.4.3 HoneyComb:!Solar!Panel!Deployment!Hinges !
Flight Proven on USAF's STPSat -1 in 2007, and currently at TRL 9, Honeybee has 
developed multiple precise locking deployment hinges for solar panels and other 
appendages. The hinges exhibit stiffness and strength, which requires agile 
maneuvering of the spacecraft attitude control system to compensate for 
structural flexibility of the solar arrays.  
6.2.4.4 CTERA!(Johns!Hopkins!Applied! Physics!Laboratory)!
Driven by power and volume limitations, the Coefficient Thermal Expansion 
Release Actuator (CTERA) developed by Johns Hopkins Applied Physics 
Laboratory is inexpensive, has a single moving part, generates no shock, uses 
little power, is re-settable, and does not consume any flight parts in its operation. 
At around TRL 6 -7, CTERA has successfully completed functional testing in 
vacuum, self-actuation testing and static load testing. The principle operation for 

--- PAGE 86 ---
 
 
75
 
 
th
e release mechanism relies on two parts that h ave complementary thermal 
expansion coefficients (Aplanel , et al., 2012).  
6.2.4.5 Solar!Array!Drive!Mechanisms!(SADM) !
The Solar Array Drive Mechanism (SADM) is a flight -tested mechanism that has 
flown for many years, and is SoA on many different spacecraft. All the major 
spacecraft manufacturers produce SADMs.  
6.3 On+the+Horizon++
A t hermally-stable, high-strain, deployable s tructure made by L'Garde, Inc.  is 
currently at TRL 2 -4. This technology is a composite made of carbon fibers and 
elastomeric resin. This combination of materials will allow for a composite with 
higher stiffness and strain in comparison to materials current ly in use for small 
spacecraft. The significance of this innovation is that the proposed material will 
enable much more capable deployable structures, as well as minimize 
complexity, mass, and cost. This technology can be used for the fabrication of 
de-orbiter devices for small satellites (Ariza, 2011).  
Deployable Space Systems, Inc. (DSS), in collaboration with the University of 
California, Santa Barbara (UCSB), Department of Mechanical Engineering 
developed the Roll -Out Solar Array (ROSA). ROSA is an inno vative mission-
enabling solar array system that offers enhanced performance for NASA's Space 
Science & Exploration missions. ROSA will aid NASA's emerging Solar Electric 
Propulsion (SEP) Space Science & Exploration missions through its ultra -
affordability, ultra-lightweight, ultra -compact stowage volume, high strength and 
stiffness, and its high voltage and high/low temperature operation capability 
within many environments  (see Figure 33). It is currently at TRL 3 -5. 

--- PAGE 87 ---
 
 
76
 
 
 
Figure 33: ROSA "Winglet" (Image credit: NASA). 
The ultra -lightweight microcellular nanocomposite  foam and sandwich 
structures originating from Wright Materials Research Co. will have high specific 
mechanical properties, do not involve or release any toxicity and are currently at 
TRL 5-6. Potential commercial markets for this ultra- low density nanocom posite 
foams and sandwich structures may include electronic housing for satellites and 
telecommunication systems (Tan, 2012) .
 
6.4 Conclusion+
In comparison with other subsystems of the satellite, the SoA for structures and 
mechanisms is well developed and at hi gh technology readiness levels. The trend 
in CubeSats is to u se commercial products from 1U to 6U. Companies such as 
Pumpkin and ISIS are leading the market. However, some developers choose to 
create their own design from a solid block of material, thereby  establishing 
additive manufacturing as a promising future technology.  
Properties of materials are standardized. Metals are valuable for their high 
strength and protection against radiation. Various types of aluminum are the 
most popular option for most  missions. A few have used titanium or 
experimented with other metals such as beryllium. Composite materials offer 
good performance but their high cost is an important downside for small 

--- PAGE 88 ---
 
 
77 
 
satellite projects. Future options may leverage improvements in the  a dditive 
manufacturing approach by using 3D printed materials. Windform XT may 
emerge as a viable option  in the upcoming years. 
Current mechanisms have a high TRL, since they need to comply with strong 
requirements in most of the missions. Deployment mechan isms need proven 
reliability before flight in order to ensure the correct behavior of other 
subsystems such as communications and power. Commercial companies offer 
interesting solutions, however various satellite s still opt to develop and build 
their own technology.  
6.5 References+
Apland, C., et al.: A Novel Release Mechanism Employing the Principle of 
Differential Coefficients of Thermal Expansion . Proceedings of the 41st Aerospace 
Mechanisms Symposium . Jet Propulsion Laboratory, May 16 -18, 2012.  
Ariza, Juan Mejia: Thermally-Stable High Strain Deployable Structures . NASA, 
2011. 
CalPoly: CubeSat Design Specification Rev. 12 . The CubeSat Program, Cal Poly 
SLO, 2009. 
Calpoly. [Online] 2010. Available at: 
http://mstl.atl.calpoly.edu/~jfoley/Spring2010/Spring Workshop 2010 
PDFs/April 23 Friday/0900 PCBSAT -RAMPART.pdf. [Accessed 01 August 2013] 
Dushku, M.: Additively Manufactured Propulsion Systems.  Small Satellite 
Conference, Logan UT , 2012. 
Frame, B.J.: Characterization and process development of cyanate ester resin 
composites. Oak Ridge National Laboratory , Engineering Technology 
Division,1999. 
Frazier, William, Verzuh, Michael, Rohrschneider, Reuben : CubeSat Strategies for 
Long-Life Missions. Low-Cost Planetary Mission Conference , 10. Ball Aerospace & 
Technologies Corp. June, 2013. 

--- PAGE 89 ---
 
 
78 
 
Inge, Kai Rokstad, Midtgår d. Birkeland, Roger. Vedvik, Nils : Investigation on the 
use of Composite Material for CubeSat Primary Structure . Norwegian University of 
Science and Technology (NTNU) , Department of Engineering Design and 
Materials.  
International Alloy Designations and Chemical Composition Limits for Wrought 
Aluminum and Wrought Aluminum Alloys (Revised: February 2009).  
ISIS: Innovative Solutions In Space . [Online] 2013. Available at: www.isispace.nl  
[Accessed 08/02/2013] 
Jun, Wei: Opportunities and Applications of 3D Additive Manufacturing . Singapore 
Institute of Manufacturing Technology . 2013.  
Mojica, Michelle A. : Structural subsystem design, analysis and optimization for a 
nanosatellite. San Jose State University , Department of Mechanical and Aerospace 
Engineering. San Jose, CA, 2012. 
Ozaki, T.: Advanced Composite Parts and Structures for Space Satellites . 52nd, 
International SAMPE symposium . 2008. 
Passaretti, M., Hayes, R. : Development of a Solar Array Drive Assembly for 
CubeSat. 40th Aerospace Mechanisms Symposium . Cocoa Beach, Florida , 2010. 
Pumpkin Incorporated: [Online] 2013. Available at: http://www.pumpkininc.com         
[Accessed 04 August 2013] 
Sandvik, Kim: Development of Composite and Polymer Material CubeSat Structure 
with focus on Materials . Norwegian University of Science and Technology, 
Department of Engineering Design and Materials . 2012. 
SSTL: [Online] 2013. Available at: http://www.sstl.co.uk/Products  [Accessed 
08/01/2013] 
Tan, Seng: Ultra-Lightweight Nanocomposite Foams and Sandwich Structures for 
Space Structure Applications . NASA Marshall Space Flight Center . Huntsville, AL, 
2012. 

--- PAGE 90 ---
 
 
79
 
 
The University of Texas : Structural Subsystem of CubeSats. [Online] 2003. 
Available at: 
http://courses.ae.utexas.edu/ase463q/design_pages/spring03/CubeSat/w
eb/Paper Sections/6.0 Structural Subsystem.pdf
. [Accessed 25 July 2013]. 
http://www.windform.it  [Accessed 30 July 2013] 
  

--- PAGE 91 ---
 
 
80 
 
7. THERMAL CONTROL SYSTEM 
7.1 Introduction+
The examination of a satellite’s thermal behavior is an iterative process that will 
predict temperature distributions throughout components and subsystems, all of 
which need to remain in an optimum temperature range for proper functionality. 
A small spacecraft can either passively or actively manage its thermal behavior. 
Passive Thermal Control Systems (PTCS) are highly attractive to the satellite 
designers, especially CubeSat and nanosatellites, because they are associated 
with low cost as wel l as low risk, and have proven reliability. If the spacecraft is 
able to preserve thermal stability without additional power requirement s then it 
is considered “passively controlled. ” This method integrates thermal blankets 
such as multi -layer insulation ( MLI), thermal coating, and thermal transfer via 
heat pipes , washers, bolts, and spacers. All of these techniques ar e the SoA for 
PTCS and are at  TRL 9 because they have been demonstrated on several satellite 
missions. It should be noted that thi s is list is not exhaustive.  
The system is actively controlled (Active Thermal Control System, ATCS) when 
thermal control is accomplished using additional power requirements. 
While PTCS are simpler and more reliable, ATCS are associated with higher 
precision and hav e been shown to be more effective for regulating thermal 
control (Hogstrom, 2013) . However, for temperature sensitive devices such as 
batteries, cameras, etc., engineers are able to equip spacecraft with electric 
heaters and coolers to maintain operational temperatures. Until spacecraft 
designers are able to miniaturize current ATCS techniques, small satellites will 
not be able to efficiently use that technology
.  
7.2 State+of+the+Art+
7.2.1 Passive+Thermal+Control+Systems+
7.2.1.1 Thermal!Insulation!!
Thermal insulation such as MLI has been used on numerous spacecraft as a 
radiation barrier from incoming solar flux. A  standard sheet of  MLI consists of 
20-30 layers of ¼ mm aluminize d Mylar, where the inner and outermost layers 

--- PAGE 92 ---
 
 
81 
 
are 1-2 m
m of aluminized Kapton (Baturkin, n.d.) , but can be made for particular 
layer densities, as shown in Figure 34. MLI material consists of a series of either 
gold- or aluminum -plated layers divided by vacuum. Depending on the number 
of layers used, MLI has low effective emissivity values (0.002 – 0.05) due to 
neighboring layers radiating heat to one another ( Hogstrom, 2013). 
 
Figure 34: MLI (Sheldalh, 2009) . 
In Figure 35, Hogstrom (2013) illu strated the effective emittance compared to the 
number of layers of aluminized mylar, where the lowest number of layers is 
proportionate to highest emittance. T he ratio of the solar absorptance to the 
emittance of the materials bombarded by the Sun is the deciding factor in the 
desired amount of solar energy that reaches  the spacecraft (Sheldahl, 2013). 
While the concept of using a thermal blanket in space can be appealing to 
satellite engineers, the delicacy of the material and manufacturing costs may 
outweigh the benefi ts of using thermal blankets on small spacecraft  (Hengeveld, 
et al., 2010).  

--- PAGE 93 ---
 
 
 
82
 
Figure 35: Effective emittance of MLI layers (Hogstrom, 2013). 
DelfiC-3, a CubeSat mission, was equipped with  MLI for eclipse durations, and 
excess heat was successfully dissipated into space via  COMM power amplifiers 
(Rotteveel, et al., n.d.). FASTRAC was also covered in Kapton thermal blankets to 
assist the passive thermal system. Examples of thermal insulation SoA methods 
are described further in Table 31. 
  
 

--- PAGE 94 ---
 
 
83 
 
Technology Description Company TRL Status Figure
 Materials include Aerospace, 
polyimide films, Fabrication 9
MLI blanket Nome threads, and and Sucessfully used on  
PTFE impregnated Materials, SCISAT I and ISS*
glass cloth (USA)
MLI blanket
Aluminized polyester, 
polymide, or 
flurocarbon
Dunmore
(USA)
9
Sucessfully flown on 
CASSINI/HUYGENS 
PROBE, ISS, and FUSE*
MLI blanket
Aluminized (one/two 
sided)  polyester, or 
polymide
SHELDAHL
(USA)
9
Sucessfully applied on 
BIRD 
9
Beta Cloth 
PTFE 
500F type of fireproof 
silica fiber cloth, used 
in addition to MLI
Chemfab
(USA)
Sucessfully used on 
Apollo/Skylab7 space 
suits, ISS, & MISSE 
mission*
Table 31: Applications of SoA thermal insulation techniques for small spacecraft . 
 
*This technology has been flight proven on larger spacecraft. No specific small spacecraft 
demonstration flight could be found  for specific MLI Company. 
 
7.2.1.2 Thermal!Coating!
Another PTCS method changes the optical characteristics (solar  absorptance and 
emittance) of the surface material simply by applying matte paint. In Figure 36, 
Anvari and colleagues (2009) illustrated the spectral absorptance/emittance ratio 
of white and black coatings. While black paint will absorb all incident heat, white 
paint limits how much heat is absorb ed from the surrounding environment due 
to its low absorption/emittance ratio (Anvari, et al., 2009).  

--- PAGE 95 ---
 
 
84 
 
 
Figure 36: Absorptance/Emittance vs. wavelength for different paints (Anvari, et al., 2009). 
The majority of satellite radiators in space are coated in white, or shades of grey 
with a range of solar absorptive values, to maximize heat rejection. For example, 
on small spacecraft PICARD (150 kg), SG12FD (white) paint was used, where the 
absorptivity and emissivity for SG121FD is 0.2+/ - 0.02 and 0.88 +/ -0.03 (MAP, 
2013), which is similar to the absorptivity (0.25 -0.5) and emissivity ranges ( -.3-
0.9) for AZ Technology white paints. Although this is an inexpensive method to 
alter the optical properties of the surface, the application of paint on a CubeSat 
requires an onsite professional, curing time, and has a relatively short usable 
lifetime (1-2 years). Figure 37 illustrates the appearance of black and white paint 
used for thermal coating on  a small spacecraft and an optical instrument.  

--- PAGE 96 ---
 
 
85
 
 
 
 
  
Figure 37: ANDE minisatellite with Ae roglaze276 white paint (Anon., 2013) (left) and CorMASS 
Optical Bench with AeroglazeZ306 black paint  (University of Virginia) (right). 
Tape is known to be a useful resource in the absence of paint; it is easy to both 
apply and remove, is relatively inexpensive, and has a longer usable lifetime than 
paint (NASA ARC Internal Communications, 2013). For instance, Falconsat- 2 
applied multiple combinations of thermal tape, aluminum and Kapton (Lyon, et 
al., 2002). Aluminum tape has an absorptivity of 0.14 and an emissivity of 0.09, 
and Kapton tape has an absorptivity of 0.39 and an emissivity of 0.63 (Lyon, et 
al., 2002) . AZ Technology, MAP, and Astral Technology Unlimited, Inc . 
manufacture thermal coatings (paint and tape) for aerospace use. BIRD applied 
white PSG 120 FD paint to its radiator as well as to the back of the outer solar 
panels (Lura, et al., 2002) . Small spacecraft MITA-O (170 kg) used MLI blankets on 
the bottom, front, and rear surfaces and painted them black to increase heat 
dissipation into space (Falvella, et al., 2003) . In Table 32, some examples of 
thermal coatings for aerospace use are shown. 

--- PAGE 97 ---
86 
Technology 
Name Description Developer TRL Status Figures
SG121FD 
Non conductive white 
paint
silicone / zinc oxide
MAP
(France)
9
Successfully flown on 
OUTSat and Demetre 
missions
N/A
PSG 120 FD 
Non conductive white 
paint 
silicone / zinc oxide
Akzo Nobel 
Aerospace 
Coatings
(Netherlands)
9
Successfully used on 
BIRD mission
N/A
Aeroglaze A276 
White paint with 
titanium dioxide/ 
polyurethane
Lord 
Techmark, 
(USA)
Inc
9
Succesfully used on 
ANDE m ission
AZW/LA-II 
Inorganic ceramic 
white paint, using 
silacate binder
AZ tech
(USA)
 9
Sucessfully flown 
MISSE*
on 
Aeroglaze Z306 Flat black absorptive 
polyurethane paint
Lord 
Techmark, 
(USA)
Inc 
9
Used on BLUEsat 
mission, and on 
CorMASS optical bench
Table 32: SoA for thermal coating on small spacecraft . 
*This technology has been flight proven on larger spacecraft. No specific  small spacecraft demonstration 
flight could be found for specific paint type. 
7.2.1.3 Heat!Pipes!
An efficient thermal transfer technology is heat pipes. This closed -loop system 
transports excess heat via temperature gradients, typically from electrical 
devices to a heat sink, allowing the energy to dissipate into space (Steinbeck, et 
al., 2010) . The heat pipes most commonly used on spacecraft are cylindrical in 
shape, and of an aluminum/ammonia 
type that allows optimal temperature 
control in the 0- 40°C range (De Parolis & 
Pinter-Krainer, 1996) , see Figure 38. Heat 
pipes are available  in a variety of designs 
(see Table 33). For example, engineers on 
BIRD (37 kg) used MLI, thermal  coating, and 
cylindrical heat pipes to thermally control 
Figure 38: Heat pipe schematic 
(Thermacore, 2013). 

--- PAGE 98 ---
 
 
87 
 
spacecraft during orbit (heat pipes from KPI, National Technical University of 
Ukraine).  
Similar to a heat pipe, a l oop heat pipe is a passive, two -phase heat transfer 
device, in which a capillary wick moves heat from one location to a condenser, or 
radiator. Loop heat pipes are more advantageous than conventional heat pipes 
because they can operate for longer periods of time, are much more flexible in 
heat transfer lines, and can operate independently of gravitational forces 
(Baturkin, 2004). For example, on microsatellite TacSat -4, the thermal control 
system relied solely on a loop heat pip e to maintain thermal stability, see Figure 
39 (Dussinger, et al., 2009) .  
 
 
 
Figure 39: Loop heat pipe schematic (Dussinger, et al., 2009). 
Also a
nalogous to traditional heat pipes are flat plates — rectangular stainless 
steel tubing sandwiched between two aluminum plates and charged with a 
working fluid inside (Nakamura, et al., 2013). Designed specifically as a C-shape, 
this technique was incorporated on the SDS -4 (50 kg) mission and has been a 
successful thermal control system (Nakamura, et al., 2013 ; see Figure 40).  

--- PAGE 99 ---
88 
Technology Description Company TRL Status Figure
Heat pipe
Close loop 
heat transfer 
system, 
either via 
capillary 
action or 
Advanced 
Cooling 
Technology, 
Inc. 
(USA)
9
Sucessfully used on 
BIRD mission
gravityTwo-phase 
heat transfer Advanced 
Loop heat pipe
device, using 
capillary 
action to 
Cooling 
Technology, 
Inc. 
9
Sucessfully used as 
on TacSat-4
TCS 
move heat to 
a radiator
(USA)
Flat 
Flat plate heat 
pipe
rectangular 
shape using 
capillary 
action to 
Advanced 
Cooling 
Technology, 
Inc. 
9
Successfully flown 
SDS-4
on 
move heat to 
a radiator
(USA)
 
Figure 40: SDS-4 minisatellite thermal control system using flat heat pipe design (Nakamura, et 
al., 2013). 
Advanced Cooling Technologies (ACT) and Thermacore Inc. produce several 
active and passive thermal control systems including heat pipes, loop heat pipes, 
flat plates, and variable conductance heat pipes for aerospace use.  
Table 33: Examples of SoA heat pipe technology for small spacecraft. 

--- PAGE 100 ---
 
 
89 
 
7.2.
1.4 Bolts!and!Washers !
To limit heat transfer, materials with low thermal conductivity such as titanium 
bolts, washers , and spacers can be incorporated into the satellite structure. 
These items reduce the thermal path to sensitive areas o n the spacecraft, such as 
the payload or battery. In one instance, Pharmasat mission engineers used 
titanium bolts and Ultem washers to help limit the heat transfer from the solar 
panels to the pressurized payload chamber (Hogstrom, 2013).  
7.2.2 Active+Thermal+Control+Systems+
7.2.2.1 Electrical!Resistance!Heaters!
Electrical resistance heaters simply supply heat to a spacecraft, specifically to the 
battery in smaller spacecraft. They are switched on and off according to the 
temperature range of a particular component, or  can be left on continuously via 
a thermal control unit (De Parolis & Pinter -Krainer, 1996) . In orbit, a CubeSat 
primarily relies on solar arrays for power production but is commonly unable to 
fully supply all of the spacecraft ’s required power during periodic peaks and 
eclipse durations (Horváth, et al., 2012). Eclipse durations can interrupt the 
amount of heat supplied to the battery or other crucial components and require 
stored electrical assistance. For example, on CubeSat MASAT-1, resistance 
heaters were attached to the Lithium -Ion Polymer battery to maint ain operational 
temperature during eclipse periods (Horváth, et al., 2012) . Nanosatellite OUTFI- 1 
also connected two heaters (250 mW each that were actuated whe n temperature 
transgressed <5º C) for the two batteries (NOËL, 2010) .  
7.2.2.2 ThermoRElectric!Coolers!
Similar to devices that need to be kept warm during spaceflight, there are also 
pieces of equipment that require low operational temperatures to function. A 
thermoelectric cooler is made up of semi -conductor-based components that 
function as small heat pumps (Farison, et al., 2010) . This device is able to 
maintain cool temperatures for sensitive devices, such as cameras and sensors, 
even when surrounded by a spacecraft’s heated constituents . 

--- PAGE 101 ---
 
 
90
 
 
For
 instance, CloudSat (3kg) required the 
assistance of a two -stage electric cooler, created 
by TE Technology, to maintain low operational 
temperatures of the camera -imaging detector 
during orbit (Farison, et al., 2010 ; see Figure 41). 
A four-stage thermoelectric cooler is available 
that can  t arget more definitive temperatures 
than the less -sensitive two- stage thermoelectric 
cooler, which allows for more precise 
temperature control.  
Figure 41: Two stage cooler from TE 
Tech. Inc., on Cloudsat (Farison, et al., 
2010). 
7.2.3 Integration+and+Modeling+
In the early production stages, thermal calculations can be performed by treating 
the system as a basic sphere with uniform optical properties representative of 
the spacecraft’s average thermal control, using only solar flux and internal power 
dissipation (Hogstrom, 2013) . Once general thermal characteristics are known, 
computer software is used to evaluate detailed thermal transfer in the s ystem. 
Thermal Desktop and ANSY S are known products for simulating the generated 
external and internal heat flux.  
7.3 On+the+Horizon+
7.3.1 Passive+Thermal+Control+Systems+
7.3.1.1 Thermal!Insulation !
 An effective and inexpensive way to insulate a spacecraft is to use MLI on the 
external surface; however, this requires special handling and installation of the 
MLI material onto the spacecraft. Silica Aerogels, developed by NASA, have a 
comparable performance to MLI efficiency and have  been demonstrated as an 
improved method of insulation . They  reduced installation time by nearly 50%, 
cost approximately 35% less, and have an 11% reduction in mass compared to  
regular MLI applications  (Hengeveld, et al., 2010) . Aerogels have the lowest 
associated thermal conductivity and density value of any solid, which means they 
have high insulation characteristics and are lightweight, as sh own in Figure 42. 
Although the material is fragile and brittle, the silica aerogel can sustain high 

--- PAGE 102 ---
 
 
91
 
 
co
mpressive pressures and can be reinforced to improve mechanical properties 
(Burg, 2006) . While silica aerogel  has not been thoroughly tested on small 
spacecraft, it has been incorporated on the Mars Exploration Rover’s therma l 
system (Burg, 2006); therefore current TRL  is estimated to be  at 4-5.  
 
Figure 42: Silica aerogel (Image credit: Wikipedia, 2012). 
7.3.1.2 Heat!Pipes!
While heat pipes have been a resourceful method of heat t ransfer for numerous 
small spacecraft  missions, ongoing work continues to improve thi s technique. 
Inventors Youssef Habib, Lyman Rickard, Bryan John, and John Steinbeck have 
patented a nano -structured wick for a heat pipe that would improve upon several 
current technological limitations. By altering the length and spacing of the 
bristles and material of the  internal wick, there have been several advancements 
in weight, size, thermal resistance, and heat flux capacity  of the heat pipe. These 
modifications have shown  a ten-fold increase in the transfer capacity in current 
heat pipes. In comparison to the current sintered powdered configuration, the 
condensed array of packed -together bristles produce s high capillary pres sure, 
increases the fluid flow in the wick, and the aligned configuration of the bristles 
supply clear paths for vapor venting, thus reducing thermal resistance 35 -50% 
(Steinbeck, et al., 2010), as shown in Figure 43.  

--- PAGE 103 ---
 
 
92
 
 
 
Figure 43: Nano-structured wick comparison to current sintered powder (Steinbeck, et al., 
2010). 
The invention of the nano -structured heat pipe  was supported by a US 
Government Phase I SBIR Navy Contract. The European Space Agency is also 
currently funding development and flight tests of miniaturized loop heat pipes 
with multiple evaporators and condense rs (Ku, et al., 2007). Validation tests have 
exceeded requirements for start up, heat transport, operation, thermal load 
sharing, and large homogeneous portfolio ( LHP) model correlation in t hermal 
vacuum environments (Ku, et al., 2007). The technology  was going to be tested 
for flight validation under  NASA’s New Millennium Program ST8 Project, however 
this project was cancelled. Current TRL status for the nano -structured wick is 5.  
7.3.2 Active+Thermal+Control+Systems+
7.3.2.1 Fluid!Loops!
A pumped fluid loop achieves sufficient heat transfer between multiple different 
locations via forced fluid convective cooling.
 Currently, mechanically pumped 
fluid loops are not attractive to small spacecraft engineers d ue to the heavy 
power consumption and small spacecraft mass limitations. However, there is a  
single- and two- phase mechanically pumped loop concept that is being 
investigated for microspacecraft thermal management (Birur, n.d.) .  
A single -phase pump circulates the fluid while a two-phase heat transfer take s 
place in the evaporator and condenser (Birur, n.d.) . For the single -phase pump 
loop, the current mass and power targets for this fluid loop system ar e less than 

--- PAGE 104 ---
 
 
93
 
 
5 kg and 5 W  to manage up to 100 W of spacecraft power (Birur, n.d.) . This 
technique is at TRL 3 -4.  
7.3.2.2 CryoRManagement!
Improved cooling technology on small spacecraft would greatly enhance the 
ability to use cryogenic p ropellants in space. Currently, aerospace engineers are 
simply miniaturizing current heat pipe cooler designs to be adapted for 
microsatellite use. A heat pipe cooler uses ‘high efficiency evaporation and 
condensation cycles of working fluid to transfer he at,’ and is advantageous over 
other active thermoelectrics (fluid and loop phase cooling) due to the lower levels 
of energy usage and noise , higher efficiency, and structural reliability (Steinbeck, 
et al., 2010) . CubeSat CryoCube-1 will demonstrate innovative thermal control 
technologies including radiation shields, MLI, and cryogenic management for l ow 
Earth orbit passive cooling . This flight test will increase the current TRL value of 
4-5 to TRL 7.  
7.3.2.3 Variable!Emissivity!Surfaces!
By simultaneously altering the optical surface properties and the path of heat 
transfer, variable emissivity surfaces can be used as a potential method for 
thermal balance modulations (Hengeveld, et al., 2010) . A radia tor with variable 
emittance capability offers comparable thermal control potential to a mechanical 
louver (see following subsection), including decreased mass, cost, and 
mechanical complexity (Paris, et al., 2005).  
7.3.2.3.1++ Micro+Louvers+
A louver, or shutter system, is a useful option to transfer heat around a 
spacecraft. It can either provide a heat sink during hot phases ( Sun illumination) 
or heat insulation during eclipse durations (De Parolis & Pin ter-Krainer, 1996) . 
However, the associated mechanisms and mass can limit the overall reliability of 
the system (De Parolis & Pinter -Krainer, 1996) , which makes it very complicated 
for smaller satellites to utilize the lou ver system. Shutters and l ouvers utilizing 
MEMS technology enable nano - and picosatellite active and efficient thermal 
control. Inventors William Trimmer and Belle Mead have devised a micro louver 
by creating a reflective/absorbing device that can be configured to control heat 
absorption and emission by  a spacecraft. This micro louver provides a reflective 

--- PAGE 105 ---
 
 
94
 
 
co
vering over the spacecraft’s surface, which can be curled up to expose the 
spacecraft to the Sun, or uncurled over surface to protect it (Trimmer & Mead, 
2001). The orientation of the reflective material will inf luence whether or not 
heat will be absorbed (warmed) or emitted (cooled) from the satellite. This idea is 
advantageous to the small spacecraft community as a basic lightweight structure.  
7.3.2.3.2++ Electrochromatics +
Materials that are electroactive, or el ectrochromic, are able to reverse their 
reflectance in the presence of an electric field, and may be manufactured into 
ultra-lightweight thin -films or coatings (Paris, et al., 2005) . When a small voltage 
is applied, a charge buildup occurs in the electrochomic materials, which  
modifies material reflectance (Paris, et al., 2005). Researchers at JPL and Ashwin -
Ushas Corporation are improving this technique for microspacecraft use  ( see 
Figure 44), which could be developed as thermal control for multiple devices. 
This technology needs to be demonstrated in orbit ; it is currently at TRL 4 . 
 
Figure 44: Dual-electrode electrochromic device (Ashwin -Ushas Corp., Inc.). 
7.4 Conclusion+
Miniaturizing thermal technology is vital for implementing many thermal control 
systems in small spacecraft. SoA techniques for small spacecraft ther mal control 
subsystems are well developed , but current advances include improving overall 
weight, mass, volume, cost, durability, and efficiency of the thermal control 
system. Thermal insulations  (MLI) and coating (paint &  tape) are effective SoA 
techniques fo r PTCS for small spacecraft; however, ATCS systems are currently 
limited in their small spacecraft applications due to mass and power budgets. 

--- PAGE 106 ---
 
 
95
 
 
Nevertheless, engineers are designing micro -devices for each technique that 
require less power and are much small er in mass, volume, and weight. While 
these proposed technologies may not have been demonstrated in space just yet, 
future testing and validation are expected to increase their low TRL value s.  
7.5 References+
Agency, E. S.: Loop heat pipe. [Online] 2007. 
Available at: http://www.esa.int/TEC/Thermal_control/SEM8JNBE8YE_0.html  
[Accessed August 2013].  
Anvari, A., Farhani, F. , Niaki, S.: Comparative Study o f Space Qualified Paints Used 
for Thermal Control of a Small Satellite . Iranian Journal of Chemical Engineering,  
6(2), 2009. 
Baturkin, V.: Micro-Satellites Themral Control . Acta Astronautica,  pp. 1-4, 2004. 
Baturkin, V., n.d.: Micro-Satellites Thermal Control Concepts and Components. 
National Technical University of Ukraine . Kyiv Polytechnic Institute , s.n. 
Birur, G., n.d.: Thermal Control of Small Spacecraft Using Single and Two -Phase 
Fluid Loops. Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology , s.n. 
Burg, B.: Thermal Control Architecture for Planetary and Lunar (Sub -) Surface 
Exploration Robots . Zurich, s.n., 2006. 
De Parolis, M. N., Pinter-Krainer, W.: Current and Future Techniques for 
Spacecraft Thermal Control 1. Design drivers and current technologies.  [Online] 
1996. Available at: http://www.esa.int/esapub/bulletin/bullet87/paroli87.htm  
[Accessed August 2013].  
Dinh, D.: Thermal Modeling of Nanosat. s.l.:s.n., 2013. 
Dussinger, P. M., Sarraf, D. B. , Anderson, W. G.: Loop Heat Pipe for TacSat -4. 
Hunstville, AL, s.n., pp. 91-100, 2009. 
Falvella, M. C. et al.: MITA: An Italian Minisatellite for Small Missions . Advances in 
Space Research, 31(2), pp. 357-361, 2003. 

--- PAGE 107 ---
 
 
96 
 
Farison, M., Hicks, K., Schmidt, M., Yang, S.: Cloud CubeSat Thermoelectric Cooler 
Controller. Baltimore, MD, s.n., 2010. 
Hengeveld, D., Braun, J. E., Groll, E. A. , Williams, A. D.: Review of Modern 
Spacecraft Thermal Control Technologies. West Lafayette, s.n. , 2010. 
Hogstrom, K.: SoA Thermal Analysis Methods and Validations for Small 
Spacecraft. s.l.:s.n., 2013. 
Horváth, G., Marosy, G., Glisics, S. & Czifra, D .: Battery characterization for 
CubeSat missions with battery tester application. Tallinn, Electronics Conference 
(BEC). 13th Biennial Baltic, pp. 97 - 100, 2012. 
Inc., T.: Loop Heat Pipe for High Density Small Satellite Thermal Control. [Online] 
1995. Available at: http://sbir.nasa.gov/SBIR/successes/ss/5 -043text.html 
[Accessed August 2013].  
Ku, J., Ottenstein, L., Pham, T. , Douglas, D.: Miniature Loop Heat Pipe with Multiple 
Evaporators. Greenbelt, MD, s.n., 2007. 
Lam, T. T., Birur, G. C., Bhandari, P.: Pumped Fluid Loops. Spacecraft Thermal 
Control Handbook, Volume  I: Fundamentals Technologies.  s.l.:s.n., pp. 405- 471, 
2002. 
Lura, F. et al.: Thermal Design and Pre Flight Thermal Test Program of Satellite 
BIRD Micro. San Antonio, TX, s.n., 2002. 
Lyon, R., Sellers, J. , Underwood, C.: Small Satellite Thermal Modeling and Design 
at USAFA: FalconSat -2 Applications. s.l., Aerospace Conference Proceedings. IEEE, 
pp. 3391 - 3399, 2002. 
Nakamura, Y. et al .: Small Demonstration Satellite-4 (SDS-4): Development, Flight 
Results, and Lessons Learned in JAXA's Mircosatellite Project. s.l., s.n., 2013. 
NOËL, J .: Thermal issues settlement and test procedure investigation of OUFTI -1 
nanosatellite. Liège, Belgium, s.n., 2010. 

--- PAGE 108 ---
 
 
97
 
 
Ol
ivia, A., Schaalman, G. , Stanley, S.: Design and Analysis of Subsystems for a 
CubeSat Mission. Worchester Polytechnic Institute, Mechanical Engineering 
Department. s.n., 2011. 
Paris, A. et al.: Electrochromic Radiators for Microspacecraft Thermal Control. s.l., 
s.n., 2005. 
Pendleton, S., Basile, J. , Fowler, E., n.d.: Low-Cost Flat Plate Adapters for Dual 
Primary Payload Missions. CSA Engineering Inc.  Mountain View, CA . 
Rotteveel, J. et al., n.d. : Delfi-C3: A Student Nanosatellite Test Bed for in- orbit 
Demonstration of Micro Systems Technology. s.l.:s.n. 
Sarda, K. et al.: Canadian Advanced Nanosatilllite Experiment 2: On -Orbit 
Experiences with a Three -Kilogram Satellite. Logan, UT s.n., 2008. 
Selva, D., Krejci, D.: Survey and Assessment of the Capabilities of CubeSats for 
Earth Observation.  Journal of Acta Astronautica,  Volume 74, pp. 50-68, 2012. 
Steinbeck, J. W., Habib, Y. M., John, B. G. , Rickard, L. H.: Heat Pipe with 
Nanostructured Wick. Patent No. US 2010/0200199 A1 . PLEASANTVILLE, NY, USA, 
2010. 
Trimmer, W., Mead, B.: Micro Louvers for Cooling. Patent No. US 2002/0056790 
A1. McLean, VA, USA, 2001. 
University of Virginia, Department of Astronomy. Virginia Astronomical 
Instrumentation Laboratory.  [Online] 200 5. Available at: 
https://www.astro.virginia.edu/research/instrumentation/cormass/photos.html  
[Accessed November 2013].  
 
 
 

--- PAGE 109 ---
 
 
98 
 
8. COMMAND AND DATA HANDLING 
8.1 Introduction+
Command and data handling (C&DH) is handled by the spacecraft flight 
computer, usually a general purpose processor. Other on -board processing may 
be needed depending on the spacecraft architecture. For small spacecraft , 
general and application -specific processing units will be discussed agnostic to 
actual function. For context, a br ief segment on processing functions will be 
provided. C&DH is the “brains” of the spacecraft , responsible for dictating 
spacecraft functions (i.e. spacecraft control and execution, data management, 
storage and retrieval) and compiling inputs and outputs of  other subsystems. 
The key characteristic of this system is high reliability (hi -rel) since it is the 
central part of the spacecraft. Often this reliability is realized by redundancy and 
use of radiation -hardened (rad- hard) components. The processing requi rement 
for the C&DH function has been relatively static through the years. In centralized 
architectures, other processing needs (e.g. payload interface, signal processing) 
are handled through a core C&DH processor.  The push for higher processing 
capabilities in C&DH and other processing elements are driven by advancing 
scientific studies looking for higher resolution and data throughput . 
In addition to the processing unit, the main compon ents of the C&DH system 
include memory, clock, and interfaces to communicate with other subsystems, as 
shown in the architecture diagram in Figure 45.  

--- PAGE 110 ---
 
 
99 
 
 
Figure 45: Typical smallsat C&DH architecture and image of C&DH board (Space Systems 
Laboratory). 
8.2 State+of+the+Art+ 
A cursory attempt is made to survey SoA hardware C&DH components to capture 
the current state of small satellite capability. The survey, while not 
comprehensive or exhaustive, should still yield good insight into the current 
state of practice for small spa cecraft. The goal of this effort is not only to convey 
basic research on the SoA, but to solicit inputs and sources to be shared with the 
greater community in future revisions.  
While smallsats, especially in the nanosat class, have higher risk tolerance an d 
are able to rely more on COTS components, much of the aerospace industry still 
relies heavily on stringent standards that ensure reliability. U sing COTS 
components has been explored and debated over the years. On one side, cost 
savings can be demonstrate d by using typical, more capable and less expensive 
COTS components at the price of increased risk. On the other hand, as smallsat 
capabilities increase, the functions that they support will have greater 

--- PAGE 111 ---
 
 
100 
 
impo
rtance and consequently will require higher reli ability. Standard COTS 
electronics fail with a total ionizing dose (TID) of 3 to 30 krads, while radiation 
hardened parts offer protection from 100 krads to Mrads. In brief, the use of 
COTS components in the development and experimental phases  is increasing  
(with proficient components being brought along to higher standards ), while 
QML Class V standards are still expected of failsafe missions.  
8.2.1 Form+Factor+
Prior to 2000, the majority of spacecraft C&DH and on- board processing boards 
were custom bui lt. As commercial technology advanced, specific standards 
emerged allowing collaborations across industries. Three form factors are 
common in space applications and are listed with dimensions in Table 34. 
Table 34: C&DH form factor. 
C&DH Form Factor Dimensions [mm] 
6U cPCI 233 x 160 mm 
3U cPCI 100 x 160 mm 
PC/104 90 x 96 mm 
 
Whil
e the dimensions in themselves are not restrictive for the larger class of 
smallsats, volumetric constraints play a crucial factor in the smaller end of the 
spectrum. The nanosats class typically uses the PC/104 backplane -less form 
factor because of limited volume. Micro - and minisats use 3U -6U configurations 
depending on the specific functional block needed with respect to the usable 
area on the board. Custom configurations are still used for special cases. Beyond 
volume, the next main limiting factor for smallsat C&DH is power. 
8.2.2 Microprocessor/Computer/Microcontroller+
Spacecraft processing capability has followed the commercial market. The slow 
development may be due to the r igors of qualifying operations in the s pace 
environment and limited production volumes. Nonetheless, processing resources 
are increasing while spacecraft processing requirements have stayed relatively 
static. Typical C&DH systems need a processing throughput of ~30 MIPS. This 

--- PAGE 112 ---
 
 
101 
 
doe
s not include payload and digital signal processing , which are driving the 
industry towards greater processing capabilities, data throughput and storage.  
Early spacecraft computers like the 32- bit RH32 and RICS/6000 provide <40 
MIPS. The RAD6000 and RAD750 , introduced in the 2000’s timeframe , are more 
capable rad-hard solutions providing up to 300 MIPS. These throughput values 
satisfy typical C&DH functions but require a lot of power (~20 W). While this is 
less of a concern for the typical 1,000+ kg satellites of the time, it poses a 
challenge for smallsats. Typical orbit average power vs. spacecraft mass is shown 
in Figure 46. 
 
Figure 46: Orbit average power vs. satellite mass  (Shimizu & Underwood, 2013). 
The general trend improves with tracking  arrays or pointable spacecraft , however 
the linear fit shows power generation typically less than 1  W per kg spacecraft 
mass. The smaller classes of smallsat are highly power constrained.  Luckily for 
smallsat designers, the world of microprocessors, computers and 
microcontrollers is ever expanding in the commercial market. Small hand -held 
and mobile devices are driving smaller form factors with low power 
consumption. In space applications,  the push for more computational power 
from payload and digital processing systems has driven the space industry to 
seek practical solutions in using COTS components and technology. In the 

--- PAGE 113 ---
 
 
102
 
 
aer
ospace industry, due to the higher reliability standards mention ed before, 
there are still just a handful of core manufacturers (Atmel, Microchip, TI, 
Freescale, etc.) that dictate trends in the market. Figure 47 shows the qualitative 
trend of processing elements used as spacecraft on -board computers. 
 
Figure 47: Satellite processing trends. 
The size of C&DH systems has  scaled down over time, to the aforementioned 
form factors. Performance, on the other hand has steadily increased more or less 
in concert with Moore’s Law. 
In terms of technology, there are microcontrollers (MCU), digital signal 
processors (DSP), field programmable gate arrays (FPGA) , and traditional 
application specific integrated circuits (ASIC). For  simple data processing, FPGAs 
outperform DSPs with regards to computational speed, power consumption, and 
volume. DSP are used for complex repetitive calc ulations (e.g. image processing 
and data compression). Often the various technologies are mixed and matched to 
meet specific requirements. Circa 2005, integrated RISC/DSP processors offered 

--- PAGE 114 ---
103 
higher performance and lower system power. For smallsats, power, t hermal and 
volume constraints are more apparent and various mixed technology solutions 
have been used. Atmel and Xilinx are two of the main manufacturers of rad -hard 
integrated circuits (IC) for space applications and their use can be seen 
throughout the industry.  
There are many differentiating factors (technologies, architectures, peripheral 
interfaces etc.) surrounding the C&DH systems. While the goal is to be as 
exhaustive and inclusive as possible in capturing the SoA of smallsat capabilities, 
for brevi ty only some prominent and recent systems will be highlighted, see 
Table 35, Table 36 and Table 37. 
  Table 35: Examples of SoA processin g elements for small spacecraft  (1/3). 
Technology Description Developer TRL Status ImageName
Remote Terminal 9Units (RTU), 32-bit, AAC MicrotechµRTU Flown on SPRITE-fault-tolerant (USA) SAT, TechEdSatprocessor
uses Actel 9
RTAX2000S/SL AeroFlex - Gaisler Flown on LEON3FT-RTAX FPGA (Sweden) Chandrayaan-1, 
ARGO, & PRIMSA 
9
AT697F Rad-Hard 32-Bit Flown on ERNObox 
(LEON2-FT) SPARC Amtel (prototype 
V8 processor (USA) computer payload) 
on ISS in 2008 & 
Proba-2 in 2009
8-bit Amtel 9AVR8 microcontroller (USA) Flown on AAUSat-3
Smart ARM 
microcontroller, Amtel 9AT91M40807 flash-based, cortex (USA) Flown on SRMSATprocessor


--- PAGE 115 ---
 
 
104 
 
N/A
Technology Description Developer TRL Status ImageName
RAD750 is a radiation 9
hardened PowerPC BAE System Flown on Curiosity, 
microprocessor.  It replaces Electronic Juno, WISE, LRO, RAD750 RAD 6000 which is a hardened Solutions Kepler, & MRO;
version of IBM RS/6000 used (USA) first flown on Deep 
by 200+ spacecrafts Impact (2005)
Mirideon Single board computer using BRE 9
PPC440 BRE440 (USA) Flown on SB-Sat
Nanomind ARM, RISC based computer GOMSpace 9
A712D processor (Denmark) Flown on STRAND 1
Super H (SH), 32-bit RISC used 9in embedded applications (e.g. HitachiSH Flown on PROITERES appliances, engine control, (Japan) (2012)mobile phone)
Intel 
(previously 9StrongARM SA1100/Xscale Digital Flown on SNAP-1, X-StrongARM processor; 88 MHz - 220 MHz Equipment Sat, FalconSat-2, experimental Corp, ARM TacSat-1, & DMC-1GLimited)
(USA)
9JAXASpaceCube II uses HRS5000S processor Flown on SDS-1 & (Japan) ASNARO
Microsemi 
Low power, reprogrammable, (previously 9RT ProASIC3 flash-based FPGA Actel) Flown on X-Sat
(USA)
9
NASA Flown/Proposed on:SpaceCube 2.0 Mini for SpaceCube 2M Goddard Intelligent Payload CubeSats (USA) Experiment (IPEX), 
TechCube, & SDS-1
 
Table 36: Examples of SoA processing elements for small spacecraft  (2/3). 
 

--- PAGE 116 ---
 
 
105 
 
Table 37: Examples of SoA processing elements for small spacecraft  (3/3). 
 
Technology Description Developer TRL Status ImageName
9STMicroelectonicsSTM32F103 N/A Flown on(Geneva) ESTCube-1
9Sparc Flown/Proposed onv7(TSC695F), Juno, WISE, Kepler, 21020 DSP, RTX- SwRISBC GLAST, Orbital 2010, (USA) Express, Deep PowerPC603e, Impact, Swift, Sparc v8(TSC697) Coriolis, & DS1
9
R3000, 32-bit Flown on EO-1, MAP, 
microprocessor, Synova ST5, CONTOUR, Mongoose-V built for DOE (USA) TIMED, New 
applications Horizons, & IceSat 
Glas
9Family of low Flown on CSSWE, power Delfi-C3, HawkSat-1, microcontroller; Texas InstrumentsMSP430 ITU-pSAT1, AIS 16-bit RISC, used (USA) Pathfinder 2, in Pumpkin GOLIAT, e-st@r, & FM430 Libertad-1
9
Xiphos First flew in 2011, Q6 processor Based on Xilinx Technologies many previous board Spartan 6 (Canada) flights with prior 
version
Only some missions actually use the latest and  most capable elements listed 
above.  Spacecraft missions have diverse processing requirements leading to the 
use of various processors and technologies.   On one hand, there are novel 
missions like PhoneSat , which used the newest technologies available in the form 
of unmodified smartphones and Arduninos as the main processing element.  On 
the other hand, it can be seen that e ven recent missions  use some of the older 
processing elements. Outdated processors such as the RAD6000 and NSSC -1 

--- PAGE 117 ---
 
 
106 
 
(NASA
 Standard Space craft Computer -1) are not listed in  Table 35 , Table 36 or 
Table 37, though they are still used from time to time.  
With many capable processing elements in the market, one of the main decisive 
factors leading to processor selection (other than matching functional 
requirements to capability ) is heritage. With that in mind, parts obsolescence 
becomes an issue with rapidly advancing technology. 
A t rending study has shown an overall increase in using integrated circuit s in 
space with a recent inclination towards F PGA’s (see Figure 48). ASICs have been 
the preferred space -based solutions as they typically offer the highest density, 
lowest weight and power, but t hey lack flexibility, have  higher cost and longer 
schedules. Smallsats are typically tied to smaller budgets and schedule, which 
leads them to use other ICs. 
 
Figure 48: Trends for integrated circuits in space (ESA; Furano, 2012). 
Another factor contributing to more FPGA usage in space applications is 
radiation tolerance. The two prominent FPGA tech nologies are SRAM - and 
antifuse-based. SRAM -based FPGAs typically offer higher densities then antifuse 

--- PAGE 118 ---
 
 
107
 
 
but
 are more susceptible to radi ation. Mitigation techniques such as triple 
modular redundancy (TMR) are typically employed. Xilinx’s Virtex -5QV FPGA 
offers a rad-hard reconfigurable processing option. Prior FPGA’s have been one -
time programmable.  
8.2.3 Memory/Data+Storage+
The range of on -board memory for smallsats is wide, typically starting around 32 
kb and increasing with available technology. Again, for C&DH functions, on -
board memory requires high reliability. Different memory technologies are 
available, but SRAM is typically used. A comparative chart showing performance 
of various memory types is shown in Table 38. 
Table 38: RAM comparison. 
 


--- PAGE 119 ---
 
 
108
 
 
Th
anks to the commercial industries and advancing technology, data storage has 
continued to increase with relatively static mass, power and volume 
requirements. This is complimented by more space usage and increases in 
reliability and heritage. Memor y and data storage are currently not of great 
concern to smallsat designers. The limiting factor in the end -to-end information 
system is the data transmission rates. Typical missions can now store more than 
they can transmit down to ground stations. Figure 49 shows the SoA capability of 
solid-state recorders. 
 
Figure 49: An example of SoA solid state recorder capability (SEAKR). 
The trend for the smaller class of smallsats to use more COTS components 
remains true for data storage hardware. High heritage developers like SEAKR are 
apparent throughout the spacecraft industry, and  emerging commercial 
companies offer high performance components. Table 39 below illustrates SoA 
technologies for data storage.  

--- PAGE 120 ---
 
 
109 
 
Table 39: Examples of SoA applications for memo ry components. 
 Technology 
Name Description Developer TRL Status Image
 
MRAM
 
magnetic material and 
silcon IC combined to 
form fast reliable non-
volatile memory
AeroFlex
9
M3Flown on , SpriteSat 
(Rising), ALL-STAR, 
SOMP, & GOLIAT
 
CASI
 
Camera and storage 
interface board BRE
9
Flown on TacSat2, XSS-
11, AMS, Angels, & 
LADEE
 
MR0A08B
 
Magetic polarization 
storage MRAM EverSpin Flown 
9
on ALL-STAR 
Rising-2
& 
 
Compact 
 
SSDR Solid state data 
recorder Innoflight
9
Flown on RASAT, 
TechDemoSat-1, & DMC-
1G,
 HSSU
 
High speed 
unit
storage SEAKR
9
Flown on GeoEye-1 
WorldView-1
& 
 SSDR Solid state data 
recorder SEAKR Flown on 
9
NEAR, ACE
 
HSDR 
 
High speed data 
recorder, 16 GB SSTL Flown on 
9
Nigeriasat-2
8.2.4 Bus+and+Interfaces+
The system bus connects major computer system components. Modern 
computing systems have a variety of separate buses customized to specific 
needs. Interfaces significantly vary from basic to extremely complex. MIL -STD-
1553 has been the standard for spacecraft and ESA’s SpaceWire (SpW) is 
becoming more prominent. For nanosats, ATK has developed t he A100 bus, 
especially designed for payloads less than 15 kg. These platforms are compatible 

--- PAGE 121 ---
 
 
110 
 
with
 most launch systems and a wide range of payload interfaces. The A100 bus 
has flown on NASA’s ARTEMIS mission.  
While universal serial bus ( USB) and controller area network ( CAN) buses  are 
being used sporadically, the I²C data protocol seems to be the most popular 
standard bus system for nanosat missions, due to power reasons . I²C consumes a 
very small amount of energy and is already integrated in most microcon trollers, 
avoiding the necessity of extra electronics. A singular and flexible interface for 
different payload types is desirable . Some of the most common interfaces are 
listed below with a brief description: 
• CAN 
Bus – Controller Area Network Bus 
I2C – inter-integrated circuit - low power consumption, low speed 
(100 kbps), multi-master capability, strong commercial support  
LVDS – low voltage differential signaling  
MIL-STD-1553 Bus – moderate speed (1 Mbps), standard for most 
OBDH systems 
MIL-STD-1394 Bus – high speed (100 Mbps)  
PCI Bus – Peripheral Component Interconnect, local computer bus 
to connect other hardware to a computer 
RS-232 – traditional standard serial connection  
RS-422 – traditional standard enabling digital differential signaling 
circuit 
RS-485 – traditional standard enabling multi -point system 
SerDes – serializer/deserializer  
SpaceWire – standard for high speed links (<160 Mbps)  
SPA-S – Spacecraft plug-and-play spacewire 
SPA-U – Spacecraft plug-and-play USB w/ +28V 
SPI – Serial Peripheral Int erconnect 
UART – Universal Asynchronous Receiver/Transmitter 
USART–Universal Synchronous/Asynchronous Receiver/Transmitter 
USB – universal serial bus  
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 

--- PAGE 122 ---
 
 
111
 
 
8.2.5 Frequency+Source+
C&DH functions include maintaining spacecraft clock or time. Timing provided 
by a frequency source enables controlled timing events, time -tagged data, and 
navigation. Traditionally, spacecraft have employed quartz resonators  for timing 
(Norton & Cloeren, n.d.). 
Recently, DARPA has made an effort to incorporate miniaturized and low power 
Chip-Scale Atomic Clocks (CSAC) into small satellites. These tiny atomic clocks 
fit into small satellites while improving frequency performance and time 
references. In addition, t he Integrated Micro Primary Atomic Clock Technology 
(IMPACT) is a project that aims to improve the capabilities of CSAC by reducing 
the power requirements while maintaining the accuracy and stability of the main 
clock. It is on its second phase and the goa l is to deliver a 20 cc, 250 mW 
working clock that will have less than 160 ns time loss after one month (DARPA). 
There are s ome series of cesium, rubidium, and quartz oscillators for frequency 
sources with proven reliability in Space.  SC-cut quartz resonators provide 
reliability and they meet NASA Grade 1 standards. They can function under 
adverse temperature conditions and their output frequency ranges from 4 to 60 
MHz. 
Other options consider the problem of high exposure to radiation. A Radiation 
Tolerant Low Power Precision Time Source (LPPTS -R) has a frequency of about 10 
Mhz. Some of the most popular vendors are Symmetricom, Kernco and Rakon.  
The classical resonators offer a reliable solution that has been used extensively 
in the last few years. Neverth eless, it appears that there is an effort to improve 
the capabilities of small satellites by adding the new micro -atomic clocks. 
8.2.6 Power+Distribution+System+Electronics+
Depending on the bus disposition, different architectures can be implemented 
for the powe r distribution on board. One of the most common interface 
standards is the 28 V bus, which is linked with a distributed architecture. By 
using distinct switchers, many components can be connected to the main core of 
the electrical power system (EPS). Anoth er option is to choose a centralized EPS 
architecture which provides more than one  power bus to manage different 

--- PAGE 123 ---
 
 
112 
 
devi
ces. Regulators are needed in this architecture and engineers should take  the 
potential for overloads into account in order to avoid failur es. Thus, there is a 
trade-off between simplicity and performance, since having multiple components 
will increase complexity.  For nanosats, volume constraints often trump added 
complexity. Table 40 illustrates a survey of nanosat  missions with different EPS 
architectures. 
Table 40: EPS architecture (Burt, 2012). 
Mission Size Architecture Distributed/Centralized #of 
Buses Bus Voltage 
AAU 1U MPPT Centralized 1 5R 
AtmoCube 1U DET Centralized 6 3.3R, 5R, 6R, -6R, -100 
Colony 1 3U PPT Centralized 3 7.2bat, 3.3R, 5R 
Compass One 1U PPT Centralized 3 3.3R, 5R 
CP3 1U PPT Distributed 6 3R, 3.7bat 
CP4 1U PPT Distributed 7 3R, 3.7bat 
CUTE-1 1U DET Centralized 3 5R, 3.7bat, 3.3R 
CUTE-1.7 2U PPT Centralized 4 3.3R, 5R, 6R, 3.8bat 
Delfi-C3 3U DET Distributed 1 12 R 
DICE 1.5U PPT Centralized 3 7.2bat, 3.3R, 5R 
DTUsat 1U  Distributed 1 3.6R 
e-st@r 1U PPT Centralized 3 7.4bat, 5R, 3.3R 
Gollat 1U DET Centralized >1 7.4bat, others 
HAUSAT 1U  Centralized 3 5R, 3.3R, 3.6bat 
Hermes 1U DET Distributed 4 7.4R, 5R, 3.3R 
KUTEsat 1U  Centralized 3 5R, 3.3R, 12bat 
KySat 1U PPT Centralized 3 12bat, 5R, 3.3R 
MEROPE 1U PPT Centralized 5 5R, -5R, 6R, 8R 
OuFTl-1 1U DET Centralized 3 7.2bat, 3.3R, 5R 
QuakeSat 3U DET Centralized 2 5R, -5R 
Sacred 1U  Centralized 2 5R, 3.3R 
SEEDS 1 1U DET  1 5R 
XI-IV 1U DET Centralized 3 5R 
XI-V 1U DET Centralized 4 5, 3, 8bat 
 
 

--- PAGE 124 ---
 
 
113 
 
Thou
gh a centralized configuration is more common, there are studies claiming 
that a distributed system is more efficient as it is more flexible and has  higher 
degree of utility (Burt,  2011). In most of the architectures shown above, the 
satellite distributes a 5  V, a 3.3 V, and sometimes a third regulated voltage to the 
battery bus. 
All the electronic spacecraft components have gone through changes over the 
last few years. A plug-and-play approach allows a faster integration of previous 
designs and platforms but all the different subsystems must comply with a rigid 
group of physical, electrical and software standards. Customized designs are 
preferred by the majority of developers to allow adaptations to specific payload 
needs. The downside  to customized electronics  is increased  requirements in 
terms of budget and time. Space plug-and-play a vionics are self -describing and 
can be thought  of as ‘black boxes ;’ they can communicate with each other by 
network protocols (Bruhn et al., 2011). Plug -and play avionics are taking a more 
prevalent role as standards are adopted yielding the possibility of parallel 
development and simpler integration for different components. Some attempts 
to realize the plug-and-play concept have been conducted. For example, the 
QuadSat-PnP mission, launched in 2011 , used this approach.  
8.3 On+the+Horizon++
While C& DH systems and on board processing both benefit from commercial 
advances and suffer from subtleties like parts obsolescence, the overall trends 
are promising. Companies like Texas Instruments and National  Semiconductor 
Corporation have taken note of the ch allenges facing spacecraft designers and 
are proactively providing solutions , including guarantees of no obsolescence and 
continual development. There are also a number of techno logies on the horizon 
that show  good promise in advancing smallsat C&DH capabi lities, ill ustrated in 
Table 41. 
 
 

--- PAGE 125 ---
 
 
114 
 
Table 41: Examples of C&DH technologies on the horizon . 
 Technology 
Name Description Developer TRL Status Image
 
Distributed 
Computing 
Collection of 
networked satellites to 
perform parallel or 
distributed computing
N/A 5 N/A
 Central 
instrument data 
 handling (CIDH)
Data management 
system developed to 
handle large data 
volume
SwRI
(USA)
3
Analysis performed on 
critical functions to 
characterize 
performance
 
Wireless 
 
bus
Wireless bus 
(bluetooth, WiFi) to 
reduce bus volume 
and design complexity
Northrop 
Grumman
(USA),
JAXA
(Japan)
3
Testbed introduced for 
design, build and test of 
wireless spacecraft bus
N/A
 
Phase change 
memory (PCM),  aka CRAM or 
PRAM
Nonvolatile 
chalcogenide random 
access memory is 
inherently radiation 
hard utilizing 
amorphous state to 
BAE (UK),
Micron (USA), 
Samsung 
(South Korea), 
Ovonyx (USA)
5
Completed QML-Q 
testing
 store bits
 Xilinx 
5QV 
 
Virtex-
FPGA
Rad-hard 
reconfiguration FPGA
Xilinx
(USA)
5
testing performed in 
relevant environment.  
To be flown on COVE 
(2013/2014)
 SpaceCube 2.0
On board data 
processor, FPGA Xilinx 
NASA 
Goddard 5
Virtex 5 (FX130T) (USA)
 
8.4 Conclusion+
C&DH is a growing and rapidly advancing subsystem area for  small spacecraft , 
with i ncreased processing power and reduced mass, power and volume. C&DH 
subsystem components with the exception of memory storage devices are 
typically small in size, thus are not a major driver of mass and volume. While 
C&DH subsystem components draw considerable power, advancing technolo gies 
in commercial area s are already providing promising solutions. One drawback to 
fast evolving electronics is parts obsolescence (e.g. 80C32 microcontroller, 
TSC21020 DSP). 

--- PAGE 126 ---
 
 
115 
 
As mentioned, the hardware solutions to satisfy performance requirements are 
abundant. As such, differentiating criteria often revolve around cost, risk and 
heritage. It is often the case that proven heritage components are more expensive 
and less capable , while developmental units in the COTS realm are appealing for 
smaller programs more willing and capable of accepting risk.  
8.5 References+
Anon.: Xilinx Virtex -5 Datasheet. [Online] 2012. Available at: 
http://www.xilinx.com /support/documentation/data_sheets/ds192_V5QV_Devic
e_Overview.pdf 
Bentoutou, Y.: A follow-up of in-orbit observations of radiation- induced effects in 
commercial off the shelf memories on -board Alsat-1. Advances in Space Research , 
Volume 48, pp. 1147- 1154, 2011. 
Bentoutou, Y.: A Real Time EDAC System for Applications Onboard Earth 
Observation Small Satellite . IEEE Transactions on Aerospace and Electronic 
Systems, 48(1), pp. 648-657, 2012. 
Bentoutou, Y., Mohammed, A. S.: A Review of in-orbit Observations of R adiation-
Induced Effects in Commercial Memories on -board Alsat-1. s.l.: World Academy of 
Science, Engineering and Technology, 2012. 
Bingcai, C., Haifeng, X. , Wei, X.: The Architecture of Picosatellite Nodes in Satellite 
Formation Network Based on Reconfigu rable Distributed Computing. Wireless 
Communications, Networking and Mobile Computing (WiCOM ). Shanghai, 2012. 
Burt, Robert : Distributed Electrical Power Systems in CubeSat Applications . Utah 
State University, 2012.  
Conde, R. F. et al.: Benefits and Lessons Learned from the use of the Compact PCI 
Standard for Spacecraft Avionics. s.l., Digital Avionics Systems Conference , 2002. 
Furano, G.: Review of Rad Hard electronics activities at European Space Agency. 
Topical Workshop on Electronics for Particle Physics (TWEPP ). Oxford, UK, 2012. 

--- PAGE 127 ---
 
 
116
 
 
Ibrahim, M. M., Asami, K. , Cho, M.: Fault Tolerant Architecture Alternatives for 
Developing Nano- Satellites Embedded Computers. AIAA Space Conference & 
Exposition. Pasadena, CA, 2012. 
Koizumi, H., Komurasaki,  K., Arakawa, Y.: Development of the Miniature Ion 
Propulsion System for 50 kg Small Spacecraft. 48th AIAA/ASME/SAE/ASEE Joint 
Propulsion Conference & Exhibit . Atlanta, Georgia, 2012. 
MacLeod, T. C., Sims, W. H., Varnavas, K. A. , Ho, F. D.: Results from on-Orbit 
Testing of the Fram Memory Test Experiment on the Fastsat Micro -Satellite. 
Integrated Ferroelectrics , 132(1), 2012. 
Norton, J. R., Cloeren, J. M.: Precision Quartz Oscillators and their use in Small 
Satellites. Small Satellite Conference . Logan, UT, 1992. 
Norton, J. R., Cloeren, J. M., n.d. : Precision Quartz Oscillators and their use in 
Small Satellites. Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory . Laurel, 
Maryland. 
Odegaard, K. A., Skavhaug, A.: Simple Methods for Error Detection and Correction 
for Low-Cost Nano Satellites. SAFECOMP. Toulouse, France, 2013.   
Pingree, P. J.: Advancing NASA's on -board processing capabilities with 
reconfiguratble FPGA technologies: Opportunities & Implications. IEEE - Parallel & 
Distributed Processing. Atlanta, GA, 2010. 
Sayyah, R., Macleod, T. C. , Ho, F. D.: Radiation-Hardened Electronics and 
Ferroelectric Memory for Space Flight Systems . Ferroelectrics, 413(1), pp. 170-175, 
2011. 
Shimizu, T. &  Underwood, C. Super -capacitor energy storage for micro -satellites: 
Feasibility and potential mission applications. Acta Astronautica, 2013.  
Staehle, R. L. et al .: Interplanetary CubeSat Architecture and Missions.  AIAA Space 
Conference & Exposition . Pasadena, CA, 2012. 
Wang, J. J.: Radiation effects in FPGAs. s.l., 9th Workshop on Electronics for LHC 
Experiements, 2003. 

--- PAGE 128 ---
 
 
117
 
 
9. COMMUNICATIONS 
9.1 Introduction+
The majority of small spacecraft missions have a primary objective to collect 
scientific data and to transmit that data back to researchers on Earth. One of the 
main impediments to data collection from in -orbit and interplanetary spacecraft 
is the transmission of data to and from the spacecraft. This section outline s the 
current SoA in small spacecraft communication technolo gies and also provides 
an overview of communication systems  that are on the horizon.  
9.2 State+of+the+Art+
Current small spacecraft technologies use an array of frequency  bands to 
communicate. The majority of spacecraft, however, tend to use the following 
spectra: 
• Ve ry High Frequency (VHF)  – 30 to 300 MHz 
Ultra High Frequency (UHF)  – 300 MHz to 3 GHz  
S Band – 2 GHz to 4 GHz 
X Band – 8 GHz to 12 GHz  
Ku Band – 12 GHz to 18 GHz 
K Band – 18 GHz to 26.5 GHz 
Ka Band - 26.5 GHz to 40 GHz 
Visible (LASER Communication)  – 100 THz to 800 THz  
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
The general purpose of any communication system is to maximize the data 
transfer rate while minimizing hardware constraints, price, and power 
consumption. These factors among others dictate the frequency spectrum that is 
appropriate for a mission. This  review of the current SoA  technology will provide 
a general overview of the hardware behind current electricity & magnetism (E&M) 
communication s ystems. It will also encompass SoA transmitters, receivers, and 
antennas. In addition, a recent survey of communication systems for all cube 
satellites launch ed between the years 2003 -2012 was conducted by Bryan Koflas 
(see Appendix I). 

--- PAGE 129 ---
 
 
118 
 
The maximum amount of data that can be transmitted over electromagnetic 
waves from point A to point B depends upon the signal to noise ratio (SnR) of the 
system and the available bandwidth. This maximum capacity is illustrated by the 
Shannon-Hartley theorem and is shown in E quation 1, where C is the maximum 
data transfer rate in bits/second, B is the bandwidth of the channel in Hertz, and 
SnR is the signal to noise ratio. Equation 1 is under the assumption that the 
carrier frequency does not approach the data transmission rat e: 
        ! = ! log! 1 + !"#     (1) 
To increase data transmission rates there must be an increase in available 
bandwidth and SnR. Due to current utilization and government regulation, 
bandwidth is limited in the microwave frequency spectrum, but is much le ss 
restricted in the visible spectrum. SnR, however, is easily controlled by hardware 
specifications and is the  target of current SoA  research. The SnR ratio issue is 
addressed by increasing the signal strength and by finding better methods to 
filter out noise. 
9.2.1 Transmitters+
Transmitters are responsible for using an input signal to modulate a carrier wave 
which is then sent to an antenna. Since regulations, project budget, and expected 
data throughput are important factors in selecting a carrier frequency, t he 
current non -exhaustive listing of SoA  transmitters for each commonly used 
spectrum is identified below.  
9.2.1.1 VHF/UHF!Transmitters!! !
VHF/UHF transmitters are a reliable, low cost solution for missions requiring 
nominal amounts of data transfer. These systems are typically used in LEO with 
omni-directional antennas, and therefore do not require a high level of pointing 
accuracy. Transcei vers/transmitters in this category can cost from hundreds to a 
few thousand dollars. Some examples of current application of VHF/UHF 
Transmitters can be seen in Table 42. 
 

--- PAGE 130 ---
 
 
119 
 
Table 42: Examples of SoA VHF/UHF transmitters. 
 
 
  
Technology Description Developer TRL Status FiguresName
UHV/VHF transmitter
Astronautical 9Helium radio Power consumption : < 6 W Development Has successfully flown transmitter Mass: ~0.1 kG  (USA) on multiple missions
Data rate:  < 38.4 kbps
VHF downlink / UHF uplink full duplex 
transceiver  Innovative 
Solutions in 9ISIS transceiver (transmit/receive) Space Over 24 units flownPower consumption : 1.7 W/0.2 W (Netherlands)Mass: 0.085 kg
Data rate : < 9600 bps / < 1200 bps
UHF/VHF transceiver
9UHF/VHF (transmit/receive) Clyde Space Has successfully flown transceiver Power consumption : 10 W/0.25 W (UK) on multiple missionsMass: 0.090 kg
Data rate : < 9600 baud / < 1200 baud 
9.2.1.2 SRBand!Transmitters!
 S-Band transmitters are a popular communication system being used on recent 
small satellite launches (see Table 43). These transmitters can be small enough in 
size to fit into a CubeSat, and can be scaled up in larger satellites to provide data 
transmission rates up to 10 Mb/s. These transmitters can range in cost from a 
few thousand to a few hundred thousand  dollars depending upon size and 
reliability. 

--- PAGE 131 ---
 
 
120 
 
Table 43: Examples of SoA S-Band transmitters. 
 
Technology Description Developer TRL Status FiguresName
6S-Band transmitter for CubeSat 
applications Integrated in Ukube-1 CubeSat S-Band Clyde Space and preparing for transmitter Power consumption : < 6 W (UK) launch.  Similar Mass: 0.08 kG components can be Data rate:  < 2 Mbps found at TRL 9
 High/Low mode transmitter with 
switchable data rates Surrey 
S-Band Satellite 9(high/low)transmitter Technology Over 24 Units FlownPower consumption : 38 W/6 W (UK)Mass: 1.8 kg /0.60 kg
Data rate : < 10 Mbps / < 38.4 kbps
Integrated S-Band data transmitter 
and reciever. Thales 9S-Band Alenia (Receive/Transmit) Has successfully flown transponder SpacePower consumption : 5W/25W on multiple missions(France)Mass: 2.6 kg
Data rate : < 2 Mbps / < 8 Mbps
 Integrated S-Band data transmitter 
and reciever.
COM DEV 9S-Band (receive/transmit) EUROPE Has successfully flown transceiver Power consumption : 4 W/14 W (UK) on multiple missions
Mass: 0.78 kg
Data rate : < 1 Mbps / < 6.25 Mbps
! !
 
 
9.2.1.3 X RBand!Transmitters!
X-Band transmitters start to approach the high data transfer rates currently 
available for fully vetted small satellite applications in the microwave frequency 
spectrum. These systems represent a significant increase in data transfer rate 
and system cost ; this  is a desirable class of transmitter for missions with large 
amounts of scientific data. For  examples of X -Band transmitter applications on 
small spacecraft (see Table 44).  

--- PAGE 132 ---
 
 
121 
 
Table 44: Examples of SoA X-Band transmitters. 
 
Technology Description Developer TRL Status FiguresName
X-band transmitter for small 
satellite applications Surrey 9
X-Band Satellite Has successfully 
transmitter Power consumption: 120 W Technology flown on multiple 
Mass: 4.0 kg (UK) missions
Data rate: < 500 Mbps
X-band transmitter for small 
satellite applications 9L-3 Cincinnati X-Band Has successfully Electronicstransmitter Power consumption: <90 W flown on multiple (USA)Mass:3.9 kg missions
Data rate: < 400 Mbps
Low power low mass option
X-Band SyrlinksPower consumption: 10 W 6transmitter (France)Mass: 0.4 kg
Data rate: < 50 Mbps 
!
  
9.2.1.4 K RBand/KaRBand/KuRBand!Transmitters !
The Ku-band spectrum is used primarily by fixed and broadcast services such as 
satellite television. Space shuttle communication systems and the ISS also use 
the Ku -band frequency for scientific ventures. Communication satellites most 
commonly use the Ka -band frequency , and the Kepler Mission uses a Ka-band 
transmitter to send scientific data. Table 45 shows some examples of SoA 
K/KA/KU-Band transmitters that are space qualified.  

--- PAGE 133 ---
 
 
122 
 
 
Table 45: Examples of SoA K,Ku,Ka -Band transmitters. 
 
Technology Description Developer TRL Status FiguresName
State of the art Ka-Band 
transmitter 3
Ka-Band Space Micro  Still scaling up (receive/transmit)transmitter (USA) performance to meet Power consumption: N/A specificationsMass: 2.7 kg
Data rate: < 3 Gbps
Ku-band transmitters with Ka-
band and X-band options General Ku-Band 9Dynamicstransmitter Power consumption: 47 W Has flown succesfully(USA)Mass:2.26 kg
Data rate: < 150 Mbps
Integrated S-Band data 
transmitter and Reciever. L-3 Telemetry 6K-Band West Tested in similar transmitter Power consumption: 30 W (USA) environmentMass: 2.8 kg
Data rate: < 1.2 Gbps
9.2.1.5 Infrared/Visible! Spectrum!Transmitters!
Laser communication systems have been explored extensively for ground -based 
communication systems, but the y are now starting to be explored as an option 
for in -orbit and interplanetary spacecraft missions. LASER communication 
systems can transfer large amounts of data with a significant decrease in power 
requirements and hardware mass from traditional microwav e band -based 
communication systems.  
The basic principle behind a LASER communication system is that a high -
powered laser is incident upon an optical receiver. Due to little beam divergence 
and how well the laser signal can be collimated, the amount of pow er required to 
transmit a signal is reduced in comparison to radio wave -based communication 

--- PAGE 134 ---
 
 
123 
 
system
s. Because the signal is so directional, these systems produce almost no 
interference with other communication systems and pose little threat to 
congesting the spectrum like many other frequency bands have done . 
This technology is being developed for ground-to-spacecraft, spacecraft -to-
ground, and spacecraft -to-spacecraft systems. LASER communication systems 
look to be an exciting new field in the small spacecr aft communications sector ; 
Table 46 provides current information.  
Table 46: An example of visible/infrared transmitters.  
 
Technology Description Developer TRL Status FiguresName
LADEE laser communication 
demonstration, data rates from 
moon orbit. 6
Infrared/visible Power consumption: 50-140 W NASA/Loral Launched on LADEE; 
 transmitter Mass: 30 kg (PPM/DPSK) (USA) Demonstrated in 
Data range: <625 Mbps/<2.88 2013
Gbps
  
 
 
 
 
  
9.2.2 Antennae+
9.2.2.1 Deployable!Antennae !
High gain deployable antennae are of keen interest to many small spacecraft 
missions. Table 47 is a sampling of standardized deployable antennae available 
to small spacecraft. 

--- PAGE 135 ---
 
 
124 
 
Table 47: Examples of SoA deployable antennae for small spacecraft. 
 
 
Technology Description Developer TL Status FiguresName
This technology provides a 
complete integrated system Surrey Integrated for a high gain antenna Satellite 9pointing high combined with a pointing Technology Flown on NigeriaSat-2gain antenna unit accurate to 0.25 o (UK)
Technology Description Developer TRL Status FiguresName
A deployable antenna for 
cube satellite missions.  Can 
Innovative Deployable deploy four monopole 9Solutions in UHF/VHF antennae. Flown on multiple Spaceantenna successful missions(Netherlands)Max RF power: 2 W
Mass: 0.10 kg
A deployable high gain 
antenna for cube satellites.Deployable BDS 6high gain PhantomworksMax gain: 18 dBiantenna (USA)Mass: 1.0 kg
A deployable high gain USC's Space antenna for cube satellites.Deployable Engineering 9
high gain Research Launched succesfully Max gain: 15 dBiantenna o Center (SERC), on Aeneas CubeSatHalf angle: 11 (USA)Mass: 1.0 kg
9.2.2.2 Integrated!Pointing! Systems!
The current integrated  pointing systems available provide a fully integrated 
system for a high gain antenna combined with accurate pointing units. The 
required accurate pointing technologies are not a main focus of this survey, but 
an example of a currently available product in this field  can be found in Table 48.  
Table 48: Examples of SoA integrated pointing systems for small spacecraft. 

--- PAGE 136 ---
 
 
125 
 
9.2.2.
3 Microstrip/Patch!Antennae!
There appears to be an increased use of Microstrip and Patch antennae in 
spacecraft communication system s. The reason for this is the microstrip and 
patch an tenna are meant to mini mize the mass and size requirements of a 
standard antenna while still maintaining good signal strength output. Microstrip 
and patch antennae are currently commercially available for a variety of 
frequency spectrums including the popular S -Band and X-Band (see Table 49).  
Table 49: An example of patch antennae for small spacecraft . 
 
 
 
Technology Description Developer TL Status FiguresName
X-band transmitter for small Surrey satellite applicationsS-Band patch Satellite 9Half power angle:  70°antenna Technology Over 70 units flownMass: 0.08 kg (UK)Gain: < 7 dBiC
9.3 On+the+Horizon++
There are many promising technologies in communication systems that are 
currently under development. These technologies cover a wide span of 
applications including novel transmitters, high gain antenna, and the use of 
additional frequency spectrums. The te chnology detailed is not an exhaustive 
list, but should provide a general idea of the areas of interest in current small 
spacecraft communication systems.   
9.3.1 KaXBand+Transmitters+
The Ka -band has the potential for even faster data transfer rates and products 
are currently in development to tap the large bandwidth the Ka -band has to 
offer. Table 50 is just one sample of upcoming Ka -band transmitters.  

--- PAGE 137 ---
 
 
126 
 
Table 50: Example SoA Ka-Band transmitters. 
 
Technology Description Developer TRL Status FiguresName
State of the art Ka-Band 
transmitter
Ka-Band Space Micro 3(receive/transmit)transmitter (USA)Power consumption: N/A
Mass: 2.7 kg
Data rate: < 3 Gbps
 
Technology Description Developer TRL Status FiguresName
Modulating retro reflectors are 
attached to satellites which can 
Modulated modulated a groundbased NASA 2-3retro reflectors signal and reflect it to transmit (USA)
data. Designed for 
visible/ifrared spectrum.
9.3.2 Modulating+Retro+Reflectors+
In an effort to reduce the power and mass load requirements placed on small 
spacecraft by their communication systems, research is being done to move 
much of that load from the satellite to the ground station. A high-powered laser 
from a ground station app lies a pulse to a satellite; the satellite then modulates 
the incoming pulse and reflects it back to a ground station.  This scheme provides 
two-way laser communication, but with all of the laser power provided by the 
ground station— the spacecraft communication subsystem, power, mass, and 
volume are very small, consisting only of the laser receiver and modulating retro 
reflector.  
Table 51: Modulating retro reflector. 
9.3.3 Integrated+Solar+Panel+Reflect+Arrays+
Integrated solar panel reflect arrays aim to increase the data downlink rate for 
small spacecraft by several orders of magnitude by acting as a high gain antenna  
(see Table 52). This technique can be incorporated with minimal additional cost, 

--- PAGE 138 ---
 
 
127 
 
mass,
 and volume as compared to a stand -alone high gain antenna. This 
technology is ideal for CubeSats or similar-sized spacecraft. A five month in-orbit 
small satellite mission, ISARA, is c urrently in the planning stages to validate this 
design.   
Table 52: Integrated solar panel reflect array. 
 
Technology Description Developer TL Status FiguresName
Using solar panels to reflect Integrated solar and concentrate radio waves to NASA JPLpanel reflect 2-3achieve higher data transfer (USA)array rates
 
Technology Description Developer TRL Status FiguresName
Communication using the X-
ray frequency spectrum.  Lab X-Ray NASA 3testing has been conducted communication (USA)with succesful digital links up 
to 1 Mbps
9.3.4 XXRay+Communication+
Research is being conducted into communication systems using the X -ray 
frequency spectrum. Among other benefits, X -ray communication systems could 
overcome the re-entry communication blackout period (see Table 53).  Lab 
demonstrations have created a digital data link > 1 Mbps. Additional in -orbit 
testing is currently being pursued  
Table 53: X-Ray Communication.  
9.4 Conclusion+
The microwave frequency spectrum is currently highly developed for use in 
satellite communication systems.  Current trends in this area involve using high 
gain antennae with high pointing precision to transmit large amounts of data.  

--- PAGE 139 ---
128 
The microwave spectrum  however, is becoming quite congested and so the use of 
other spectrums, such as visible, seems promising.  Optical communication 
systems are an area of heavy research and development at the moment and have 
the potential to provide increased data transfer rates with nominal bandwidth 
pollution compared to the microwave frequencies.  Figure 50 below depicts the 
maximum achievable data transfer rates for different freque ncy spectrums.  In 
spite of the early development stage, optical communication is already 
surpassing traditional transmitters.  
1!
10!
100!
1000!
10000!
100000!
1000000!
10000000!
UHF/VHF! S5Band! X5Band! K5Band! Visible!
Data(Rates((kbps)(
Data!Rates!(kbps)!
Figure 50: Data rates for frequency bands. 
9.5 References++
Astronautical Development : AstroDev Helium Radios. [e-book] Astronautical 
Development, 2009. 
http://www.astrodev.com/public_html/downloads/datasheet/Helium -
Specification.pdf [Accessed: 20th Augu st, 2013]. 
BDS Phantom Works : Miniature Deployable High Gain Antenna . [e-book] BDS 
Phantom Works, 2011.  
http://mstl.atl.calpoly.edu/~bklofas/Presentations/DevelopersWorkshop2011/47_Ma
cGillivray_Miniature_Antennas.pdf  [Accessed: August 20th, 2013].  


==================================================
SECTION: Thermal Control (Pages 198-218)
==================================================

--- PAGE 198 ---
187


--- PAGE 199 ---
188


--- PAGE 200 ---
189 


--- PAGE 201 ---
190


--- PAGE 202 ---
191


--- PAGE 203 ---
 
 
192 
IV.  
V.  
VI.  
VII.  
VIII.  
IX.  
X.  
XI.  
XII.  
XIII.  
XIV.  
XV.  
XVI.  
XVII.  
Table A.2: CubeSat communications technology - part 1
*
.
 
 
*The origin al version of this Table can be found on http://www.klofas.com/comm-table/  . The Table has been divided in two parts for better visualization. 


--- PAGE 204 ---
 
 
193
 
 
XVIII.  
XIX.  
XX.  
XXI.  
XXII.  
XXIII.  
XXIV.  
XXV.  
XXVI.  
 
 
 
 
 
 


--- PAGE 205 ---
 
 
194
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


--- PAGE 206 ---
 
 
195 
 
XXVII.  
XXVIII.  
XXIX.  
XXX.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table A.2: CubeSat communications technology - part 2 


--- PAGE 207 ---
 
 
196 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


--- PAGE 208 ---
 
 
197
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


--- PAGE 209 ---
 
198 
 
  APPENDIX: LIST OF ACRONYMS 
 
ABC Aft Bulkhead Carrier  
ACT ! Advanced Cooling Technologies  
ADCS  ! Attitude Determination and Control System  
ADN ! Ammonium di-nitramide  
AFB ! Air Force Base  
AFSCN ! Air Force Satellite Control Network  
ALASA ! Airborne Launch Assist Space Access  
AMPS Additively Manufactured Propulsion System  
APM ! Antenna Pointing Mechanisms  
ARC ! Ames Research Center  
ARCS ! Austrian Research Centres Seibersdoorf  
ASIC ! Application Specific Integrated Circuits  
ASRG ! Advanced Stirling Radioisotope Generator  
ATCS ! Active Thermal Control System  
BOL ! Beginning of Life  
C&DH ! Command and Data Handling  
CAN ! Controller Area Network  
CAP ! C-Adapter Platform  
CAT ! CubeSat Ambipolar Thruster  
CDS ! CubeSat Design Specification  
CMGs ! Control Moment Gyros  
CNC ! Computer Numerical Controller  
COTS ! Commercial off the shelf  
CPU ! Computer Processing Unit  
CSAC ! Chip-Scale Atomic Clocks  
CSD ! Canisterized Satellite Dispenser  
CTERA ! Coefficient Thermal Expansion Release Actuator  
DARPA Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency  
DET Direct Energy Transfer  
DICE ! Dynamic Ionosphere CubeSat Experiment  
DoD ! Department of Defense  
DSS ! Deployable Space Systems, Inc.  
E&M ! Electricity & Magnetism  
EDM ! Electrical Discharge Machining  
EIRP ! Effective Isotropic Radiated Power  
EMC ! Electromagnetic Compatibility  
EOL ! End of Life  
EPS ! Electrical Power Systems  
ESPA ! EELV Secondary Payload Adapter  
!

--- PAGE 210 ---
 
199 
 
FA
STSAT Fast, Affordable, Science and Technology Satellite  
FCC Federal Communications Commission  
FPGA ! Field Programmable Gate Arrays  
GENSO ! Global Educational Network for Satellite Operations  
GEO Geostationary Orbit  
GNSS ! Global Navigation Spacecraft Systems  
GPIM ! Green Propellant Infusion Mission  
GS ! Ground Station 
HAN ! Hydroxyl Ammonium Nitrate  
hi-rel ! High Reliability  
HNF ! Hydrazinium Nitroformate  
IC ! Integrated Circuits  
IMPACT ! Integrated Micro Primary Atomic Clock Technology  
Isp Specific Impulse  
ISS ! International Space Station  
J-SSOD ! Japanese Small Satellite Orbital Deployer  
JEM Japanese Experiment Module  
LEO ! Low Earth Orbit  
LHP ! Large Homogeneous Portfolio  
LPPTS-R ! Radiation Tolerant Low Power Precision Time Source  
LS Laser Sintering  
LV ! Launch Vehicle  
MCC ! Mission Control Center  
MCU ! Micro Controller Unit  
MEMS ! Micro-Electromechanical systems  
MEMS ! Micro-Electro-Mechanical Systems  
MEO ! Medium Earth Orbit  
MiXI ! Miniature Xenon Ion Thruster  
MLI ! Multi-Layer Insulation 
MMRTG ! Multi-Mission RTG  
MOC Mission Operations Center  
MPACS ! Micro Propulsion Attitude Control System  
MPAP Multiple Payload Adapter Plate  
NEXT ! NLS Enabling eXploration & Technology  
NLAS ! NanoSat Launch Adapter System  
NLS ! NASA Launch Services  
NOFB ! Nitrous Oxide Fuel Blend  
NPSCul ! Naval Postgraduate School’s CubeSat Launcher  
National Telecommunications and Information NTIA Administration  
OMS ! Orbital Maneuvering System  
OSAGS ! Open System of Agile Ground Stations  
OSL Office of Space Launch  
!

--- PAGE 211 ---
 
200 
 
P
-POD Poly Picosatellite Orbital Deployer  
POCC ! Payload Operations Control Center  
PPT ! Peak Power Tracking  
PPT ! Pulsed Plasma Thrusters  
PPUs ! Power Processing Units  
PTCS ! Passive Thermal Control Systems  
RAMPART ! RApidprototyped MEMS Propulsion and Radiation Test  
RHU Radioisotope Heating Units  
ROSA ! Roll-Out Solar Array  
RTGs ! Radioisotope Thermal Generators  
S/C ! Spacecraft 
SADM ! Solar Array Drive Mechanism  
SEP ! Solar Electric Propulsion  
SnR ! Signal to Noise Ratio  
SoA ! State of the Art 
SOCC ! Spacecraft Operations Control Center  
SpaceX ! Space Exploration Technologies  
SpW SpaceWire  
SRPS ! Small Radioisotope Power System  
SSO ! Sun Synchronous Orbit  
SSPS ! Spaceflight Secondary Payload System  
SSTP ! Small Spacecraft Technology Program  
SSTP ! Small Spacecraft Technology Program  
SUM ! Six Unit Mount  
TASC ! Triangular Advanced Solar Cell  
TBD ! To Be Determined 
TCS ! Thermal Control Systems  
TID ! Total Ionizing Dose  
TMR ! Triple Modular Redundancy  
TRL ! Technology Readiness Level  
TRL ! Technology Readiness Level  
TT&C ! Tracking, Telemetry and Command  
UCSB ! University of California, Santa Barbara  
USB ! Universal Serial Bus  
!   
 
 


==================================================
SECTION: Small Spacecraft Avionics (Pages 219-243)
==================================================


==================================================
SECTION: Communications (Pages 244-280)
==================================================


==================================================
SECTION: Ground Data Systems and Mission Operations (Pages 304-372)
==================================================


==================================================
SECTION: Guidance, Navigation, and Control (Pages 140-167)
==================================================

--- PAGE 140 ---
 
 
129
 
 
Cincinnati Electronics : T-724A HIGH DATA RATE X -BAND TRANSMITTER. [e -book] 
Cincinnati Electronics , 2013. Available at: 
http://www.cinele.com/images/space_datasheets/t -724a_x-band.pdf          
[Accessed: August 20th, 2013].  
Cincinnati Electronics : T-720 TRANSMITTER. [e-book] Cincinnati Electronics , 2007.  
http://www.cinele.com/images/space_datasheets/t -720.pdf [Accessed: August 20th, 
2013]. 
Clyde-space.com: CPUT CMC: UHF/VHF Transceiver, Communication Systems 
CubeSat. [online] 2013. Available at:             
http://www.clyde-space.com/CubeSat_shop/communication_systems/170_cmc -uhf-
vhf-transceiver [Accessed: 26 Aug 2013].  
Clyde-space.com: CPUT CubeSat S-Band Transmitter, Communication Systems 
CubeSat. [online] 2013. Available at:             
http://www.clyde-space.com/CubeSat_shop/communication_systems/301_ CubeSat-s-
band-transmitter [Accessed: 26 Aug 2013].  
COM DEV EUROPE: S-Band TT&C Transceiver . [e-book] COM DEV EUROPE , 2010.  
http://www.comdev.ca/docs/TTC Data sheet V2 -10.pdf [Accessed: August 20th, 
2013]. 
Klofas, Bryan: CubeSat Developers' Workshop 2013 . [online] 2013. Available at: 
http://mstl.atl.calpoly.edu/~bklofas/Presentations/DevelopersWorkshop2013/  
Klofas, Bryan: CubeSat Developers' Workshop 2008 . [online] 2008. Available at: 
http://mstl.atl.calpoly.edu/~bklofas/Presentations/DevelopersWorkshop2008/  
CubeSatshop.com: ISIS VHF downlink/UHF uplink Full Duplex Transceiver . [online] 
2012. Available at: 
http://www.CubeSatshop.com/index.php?page=shop.product_details&category_id=5
&flypage=flypage.tpl&product_id=73&option=com_virtuemart&Itemid=67  [Accessed: 
26 Aug 2013]. 
Directory.eoportal.org : LADEE - eoPortal Directory - Satellite Missions - Earthnet 
Online. [online] 2011. Available at: 

--- PAGE 141 ---
 
 
130
 
 
https://directory.eoportal.org/web/eoportal/satellite -missions/l/ladee [Accessed: 26 
Aug 2013]. 
Gendreau, K.: X-Ray Comm. [email] Sent August 15th, 2013.  
General Dynamics: Ku/Ka/X-Band High Rate Transmitter (HRT150) . [e-book] General 
Dynamics, 2012.                   
http://www.gd-ais.com/Documents/High Rate Transmitter (HRT150).pdf [Accessed: 
August 20th, 2013].  
Innovative Solutions In Space : Deployable UHF and VHF antennas . [e-book] Innovative 
Solutions In Space, 2013.  
http://www.isispace.nl/brochures/ISIS_AntS_Brochure_v.7.11.pdf  [Accessed: August 
20th, 2013]. 
L3 Telemetry West : K-Band OQPSK Transmitter . [e-book] L3 Telemetry West , 2012.  
http://www2.l-3com.com/tw/pdf/datasheets/ML601_Rev D.pdf  [Accessed: August 
20th, 2013]. 
NASA JPL. n.d.: ISARA - Reflectarray Antenna for High  Bandwidth Communications. 
[e-book] NASA JPL. http://www.nasa.gov/pdf/706631main_sstp_3_projects.pdf  
[Accessed: August 20th, 2013].  
Salas, A., Stupl, J. and Mason, J. : Modulating Retro-Reflectors: Technology, Link 
Budgets And Applications . 63rd International Astronautical Congress , 2013. 
[Accessed: 27 Aug 2013]. 
Space Micro: µTx-300 Ka-Band Transmitter. [e-book] Space Micro, 2013.  
http://www.spacemicro.com/pdfs/KA -Band v5.0.pdf [Accessed: August 20th, 2013].  
Sstl.co.uk. n.d.: High Gain X-Band Antenna Pointing Mechanism . [online] Available at: 
http://www.sstl.co.uk/Products/Subsystems/Communication/Antennas/High -Gain-
X-Band-Antenna-  

--- PAGE 142 ---
 
 
131 
 
10. INTEGRATION, LAUNCH AND DEPLOYMENT 
10.1 Introduction+
The current development of small spacecraft integration, launch, and 
deployment systems has largely been focused on leveraging existing launchers 
for much larger vehicles. To reduce costs, small spacecraft are often allocated a 
chunk of the mass margin leftover after the primary mission defines most launch 
criteria. In this paradigm, small spacecraft are certainly not the drivers of launch 
requirements and are usually designed explicitly for minimal interfere nce to the 
primary mission. As small spacecraft grow i ncreasingly popular and capable , 
launch vehicles, integration, and deployment systems must meet the challenges 
of rising demand and capabilities. SoA technologies in these areas are 
responding to the ch anging small spacecraft market to support new, advanced 
missions with diverse technologies that will take small spacecraft further into 
both space and the future.  
SoA launch vehicles such as the Evolved Expendable Launch Vehicle (EELV) 
boosters were not or iginally designed for hosting small payloads. Since launch 
vehicles rarely match the exact capabilities needed by the primary customer, 
there is usually enough leftover mass, volume, and other performance margins 
available for delivery of small spacecraft.  Small spacecraft can share this “free” 
space for a cheap ride to space. A large market of adapters and deployment 
technologies has been created to compactly house multiple small spacecraft on 
these heritage launchers. These technologies provide both a secure attachment to 
the launcher as well as mechanisms for departure at the appropriate time. In the 
future, though, the expanding capabilities of small spacecraft payloads will 
demand a dedicated launcher. For missions that need a very specific science 
orbit, interplanetary trajectories, precisely timed rendezvous, or special 
environmental considerations, flying the spacecraft as a primary payload may be 
the best method of ascent. Highly capable host spacecraft will provide greatly 
expanded capabilities to l arge launchers as well. Through innovative dedicated 
launchers or integration mechanisms, the mission envelope for small spacecraft 
can be greatly expanded. This will enable fields from technology development to 
hard sciences to take advantage of the quick  iteration time and low capital cost 

--- PAGE 143 ---
132 
of small spacecraft to yield new and 
exciting advances in space capabilities 
and understanding.  
10.2 State+of+the+Art+
10.2.1 Launch+Vehicles 
10.2.1.1 Primary!Payloads !
The primary payload market for small 
spacecraft is currently very limited. To 
date, only a few modern vehicles are 
available specifically for small 
spacecraft. Since the growth in 
popularity of small space craft is a 
recent development, a robust market of 
small launchers has not yet developed. Of the vehicles on the market, though, 
the Super Strypi/SPARK (Spaceborne Payload Assist Rocket ; see Figure 51) rocket 
has TRL value of 9 and is a promising technology . Developed jointly by the 
Innovative Satellite Launch Program at the University of Hawaii in cooperation 
with Sandia National Laboratories and Aerojet , SPARK is an evolved version of 
Sandia’s Super Strypi research rocket that is designed to deliver 250 kg to a 400 
km Sun-synchronous orbit from Kauai, Hawaii. It is designed to integrate 
payloads with the NASA Ames payload adapter and deployer. Launch of a 1U 
spacecraft is anticipated to be only ~$40-60K, and launch of a 12U is ~$1.5M 
(Taylor, 2013). The first launch is planned for October 2013 (David, 2013).  
The Pegasus, an air -launched vehicle built by Orbital Sciences, is a small - to 
medium-lift launcher that has already built a heritage of successful launches 
since 1996. The system can deliver 450 kg to LEO with three  solid stages. The 
rocket has a record of 26 consecutive fully succ essful missions including the 
recent NASA Interface Region Imaging Spectrograph (IRIS) mission launched in 
June 2013 aboard a Pegasus XL variant (NASA, 2013) . This system allows greater 
mobility and flexibility in launch since the rocket is launched from a carrier 
aircraft (Orbital Sciences, 2013) .  
Figure 51: The Super Strypi and SPARK 
launchers (Brügge, n.d.) . 


--- PAGE 144 ---
 
 
133 
 
Technology Description Developer TRL Status FiguresName
Rocket family 9currently with 580 kg Orbital Sciences First launch of family in Minotaur to LEO (Minotaur I) (USA) 2000; launch of and 437 kg to TLI Minotaur V in 2013(Minotaur V)
9Air-launched, three- Launched successful stage orbital vehicle Orbital Sciences Pegasus IRIS mission; 26 with up to 450 kg to (USA) consecutive fully LEO successful missions
Brazilian Space 6380 kg to LEO; three- Agency (AEB), Multiple tests of Satellite launch stage solid, eventual with Russian vehicle, but no vehicle VLS-1 evolution to some assistance successfully flown liquid stages (Foreign) missions yet
Small, three-stage, all- University of solid orbital 7Hawaii, Sandia, Super Strypi expendable launcher Will fly HiakaSat by late Aerojet with 250 kg payload to 2013(USA)400 km SSO
NASA Launch 6 or higher   NLSP nano-sat Services; Draft RFI prepared at 15 kg to 425 km launcher (NEXT Contractor not http://prod.nais.nasa.go N/Aminimum specsprogram) yet selected v/eps/eps_data/156837-
(USA) DRAFT-001-001.pdf
Another vehicle produced by Orbital Sciences, the Minotaur, is the last medium -
lift launcher currently available to be considered as a SoA primary payloa d 
launch vehicle. With a payload capacity of 580 kg to LEO, the Minotaur would be 
overkill for most small satellite missions, but could still be valuable depending 
on destination and number. Out of the entire rocket family, the Minotaur I is the 
most appli cable to small satellites since it has the lowest payload and cost, and 
has conducted ten missions successfully. The Minotaur I is designed with four 
solid stages from a converted Minuteman ballistic missile (Orbital Sciences, 
2013). 
Table 54: Examples of SoA primary launch vehicles for small spacecraft. 

--- PAGE 145 ---
134 
10.2.1.2 Secondary!Payloads!
Secondary payload arrangements provide far more options for immediate launch 
at high TRL. Workhorse vehicles like the Atlas V and Soyuz now carry secondary 
payloads as regular course. Since almost any large launcher can fit a small 
payload within mass and volume margins, there is no shortage of options for 
craft that want to fly as a secondary. Even on small vehicles like the Super 
Strypi/SPARK, there is often enough extra performance to squeeze in at least a 
1U CubeSat. 
The EELV program’s boosters, the Atl as V and Delta IV, have been the most 
common and capable secondary launchers for small spacecraft programs to date. 
The EELV Secondary Payload Adapter (ESPA ring) has flown everything from 
larger payloads like the NASA LCROSS mission to several small CubeSats in Poly 
Picosatellite Orbital Deployers (P -PODs). With a diverse family of launchers and a 
fully developed  integration and launch services scheme, the EELVs are the most 
successful small spacecraft launchers currently available.  
The Atlas V (see Figure 52 ) can deliver from approximately 9,800 kg to almost 
19,000 kg into a 200 km LEO orbit at 28.7 ° 
depending on configuration. The Atlas 
program enjoys a long heritage reaching 
back over 600 launches, and the Atlas V has 
been 100% successful since its introduction. 
The Delta IV is a heavier lift EELV that can 
deliver from approximately 9,200 kg to over 
28,000 kg to a 200 km LEO orbit at 28.7°  
depending on configuration. Although the 
Delta IV does not share the same long flight 
history as the Atlas, it provides good 
opportunities for secondary launch es due to 
its extreme payload capability (United 
Launch Alliance, 2013) .  
The Falcon family of rockets from Space Exploration Technologies (SpaceX) is 
proving to be another valuable asset to the small spacecraft community as well. 
Figure 52: Atlas V with the LCROSS 
and LRO payloads (Atkinson, 2009). 

--- PAGE 146 ---
 
 
135 
 
SpaceX’s
 only current launcher is the Falcon 9, a two- stage LOX/RP -1 vehicle 
capable of lifting over 13,000 kg to LEO. SpaceX’s contracts with NASA to provide 
cargo services and eventually crewed missions to the International Space Station 
means those opportunities to rideshare will con tinue into the far future. All five  
launches to date have been successful. SpaceX is currently redesigning the 
vehicle to yield higher performance and lower costs, and plans to achieve at least 
partial reusability which could dramatically lower costs for all spacecraft 
(Technologies, Space Exploration, 2013). 
Foreign vehicles such as the Soyuz and Dnepr -1 are also viable competition in the 
market. Like the Atlas, Soyuz also enjoys a long heritage and is one of the most 
popular launchers in the world . Both Soyuz and Dnepr -1 are designed and built 
in Russia. The Soyuz is the only current launcher for human crews to the ISS.  
 
Table 55: Examples of SoA secondary launc h vehicles for small spacecraft . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Technology Description Developer TRL Status FiguresName
Two-stage launcher 9with solid and liquid Orbital SciencesAntares Launcher for successful stages for payloads (USA) PhoneSat missionover 5,000 kg to LEO
European civilian 9launcher family; European Space Ariane 1 first current Ariane 5 is Ariane 5 Agency operational in 1979; heavy lift vehicle (Foreign) Ariane 5 first capable of 20,000 kg to operational in 1996LEO
Evolved expendable 9
9,800-18,850 kg to LEO; United Launch Hot Bird 6 first launch; 
Atlas V multiple secondary Alliance has flown several 
payloads aboard ESPA (USA) CubeSats and other 
ring small satellites since


--- PAGE 147 ---
 
 
136
 
 
  
2,700 kg - 6,100 kg to United Launch LEO; two-stage liquid 9Delta II Alliancewith option third First launch in 1989(USA)stage
Rocket family with United Launch medium- and heavy- 9Delta IV Alliancelift options; 8,600 kg - First launch in 2002(USA)22,560 kg to LEO
Yuzhny 
4,500 kg to LEO; three- Machine- 9Dnepr-1 stage, hypergolic Building Plant First launch in 1999
(Foreign)
13,150 kg to LEO; Space 
ongoing design for Exploration 9Falcon 9 reusability; LOX/RP1 Technologies First launch 2010
two-stage booster (USA)
53,000 kg to LEO; Space 7
ongoing design for Exploration Multiple Falcon 9 core Falcon heavy reusability; LOX/RP1 Technologies flights for NASA 
two-stage booster (USA) COTS/CRS missions
Mitsubishi 10,000 kg (H-IIA) - 9Heavy H-IIA/B 16,500 kg (H-IIB) to First launch of H-IIA in Industries LEO 2001(Foreign)
ISS Partners; 
launcher for 9Hand-launch or P-POD International CubeSats on J-SSOD deployed deployment for Space Station JEM (Japanese multiple CubeSats on CubeSats Experiment Expedition 33
Module) (Mixed)
1,500 kg to LEO; Yuzhnoye/NPO 9Kosmos-3m IRFNA/UDMH-fueled Polyot First flight in 1967two-stage (Foreign)
China Academy 9
Widely varies; of Launch First of family launched 
Long March currently 2,400 kg - Vehicle in 1970; most recent 
11,200 kg to LEO Technology launch of taikonauts in 
(Foreign) June 2013 


--- PAGE 148 ---
 
 
137 
 
 
Rocket family 9
currently with 580 kg First launch of family in Orbital Sciences 
 Minotaur to LEO (Minotaur I) 2000; launch of (USA)and 437 kg to TLI Minotaur V in 
(Minotaur V) September 2013
 
9Air-launched, three-
  Launched successful stage orbital vehicle Orbital Sciences Pegasus IRIS mission; 26 with up to 450 kg to (USA) consecutive fully LEO successful missions
Indian Space 
3,250 kg to LEO Research 9PSLV (standard) Organization First flight 1993
(Foreign)
Eurockot 1,950 kg to LEO; three- 9Rokot-KM Launch Services stage, liquid First flight in 1990(Foreign)
9
Large heritage of Rocket family; three- OKB-1, TsSKB- missions; currently Soyuz stage LOX/RP1 with Progress only man-rated 7,100 - 7,800 kg to LEO (Foreign) launcher to ISS; first 
flight in 1966
Boeing, ATK, 7Pratt & Whitney Initially 70,000 kg to First flight scheduled Space Launch Rocketdyne, LEO, evolved to for 2017; significant use System NASA, and 130,000 kg of shuttle-derived others components(USA)
Small, three-stage, all- University of solid orbital 7Hawaii, Sandia, Super Strypi expendable launcher Will fly HiakaSat by late Aerojet with 250 kg payload to 2013(USA)400 km SSO
91,320 kg to LEO; four Orbital Sciences Taurus First launch in 1994, but solid stages (USA) notable recent failures
European small 
launcher with 300- 92,500 kg primary European Space CubeSats flown in 2007 Vega payload and up to 9 Agency on maiden flight of CubeSats; reference (Foreign) vehiclemission is 1,500 kg to 
700 km polar orbit


--- PAGE 149 ---
 
 
138
 
 
10.2.2 Payload+Adapters+and+Deployment+
Currently no launch vehicle dedicated to payloads less than 180 kg is available , 
thus most small satellites must ride as secondary payloads. In order to 
accommodate this class, and in order to fully use available payload space on 
launch vehicles, adapters have been created to store, isolate and deploy 
secondary payloads. A broad spectrum of adapters exists to serve payloads of 
different sizes, as shown in Figure 53. 
 
 
Figure 53: Examples of secondary payload adapters available to serve payloads of various 
masses, ranging from nanosatellites to minisatellites ( Image credit: United Launch Alliance).  
10.2.2.1!Nanosatellites!0R10!kg!
The n anosatellite class is dominated by CubeSats. Although the CubeSat 
architecture does not strictly limit spacecraft mass to be less than 10  kg, to-date 
CubeSats missions have fit within this range. While nanosatellites ex ist outside 
the form factor of the CubeSat, they require individualized adapters. Therefore 
the focus of this section is on integration systems conforming to the CubeSat 
architecture.  

--- PAGE 150 ---
139 
The CubeSat form lends itself to container based 
integration systems. While several systems exist, the 
standard deployer is the Poly Picosatellite  Orbital 
Deployer, or P -POD, named for California Polytechnic 
State University where it was originally developed . 
The P -POD is a rectangular 7075 -T73 aluminum 
container which can hold up to 10  x 10 x 34 cm of 
deployable spacecraft, either three 1U CubeSats or one 
3U CubeSat, or a mix of intermediate sizes. The 
container acts as a Faraday cage , so hosted payloads 
meet electromagnetic compatibility (EMC) standards. 
Deployment is achieved by a pusher plate and spring 
ejection system. The main driver spring is aligned with 
the central axis of the P- POD (see Figure 54. If more than 
one satellite is loaded, additional spring plungers placed 
between CubeSats are used to provide initial separation between payloads. The 
interior is anodized with a Teflon -impregnated solution to ensure smooth 
deployment. The tubular design of the P -POD prevents rotation of the CubeSats 
during ejection, ensuring linear trajectories. The exit velocity of the CubeSat is 
designed to be 1.6 m/s, though the central spring may be replaced to achieve 
different exit velocities (Lan, 2007) . Typically P- PODs are connected to a larger 
secondary payload interface and not directly to the launch ve hicle (see 
Microsatellites and M inisatellites subsections for more information ). 
Other POD designs exist, thou gh the systems are essentially the same as the P -
POD. Such systems include T -POD, X -POD, ISIPOD, and EZPOD. Details on these 
technologies may be found in 
Table 56. One should note these deployers are not 
necessarily competitors to the P -POD, but rather exist to provide various 
organizations rideshare opportunities when room for secondary payloads opens 
on launch vehicles (Kramer, 2012).  
Figure 54: P-POD ejection 
spring (Image credit: 
http://rjwagner49.com/Pe
rsonal/Work/Mayflower/ ). 

--- PAGE 151 ---
 
 
140 
 
Table 56: Examples of SoA 1-3U POD deployers for small satellites . 
Technology Description  Developer TRL Status FiguresName
9Tubular container Spaceflight, Successfully deployed 4 P-POD which deploys up to Inc. CubeSats from 3U CubeSats (USA) Eurockot in 2003
9University of Adapter used to Successfully used to T-POD Tokyodeploy a 1U CubeSat deploy XI-V CubeSat in (Japan) 2003
Customizable adapter UTIAS Space 9
which deploys up to Flight Successfully used to X-POD 14kg, inlcuding Laboratory deploy CubeSats on 
CubeSat standard (Canada) ISRO PSLV-C9 in 2008
9CubeSat launch 3U ISIPOD successfully adapter capable of ISISISIPOD deployed Cosmogia's carrying 1, 2 and 3 U (Netherlands) Dove-1 and Dove-2 CubeSats spacecraft in 2013
Andrews 9US version of ISIPOD, Space, Inc. and Successfully used to EZPOD 6U and 12U versions ISIS, deploy STRanD-1 in development (USA and CubeSat in 2013Netherlands)
9
Japan Successfully deployed 
Aerospace CubeSats including Deploys up to 6 1U J-SSOD Exploration RAIKO, FITSAT-1, WE CubeSats from the ISS Agency (JAXA), WISH, NanoRacks 
(Japan) CubeSat-1/F-1 and 
TechEdSat
8
System has been tested 1U CubeSat deployer Ecliptic on zero gravity and sub-Rocket Pod based on RocketCam Enterprises orbital flights. First system (USA) mission will be the 
BarnacleSat Mission
 

--- PAGE 152 ---
 
 
141 
 
Ecl
iptic Enterprises developed an approach for carrying CubeSat secondary 
payloads on the exterior of rockets. The device, known as RocketPod ™, may also 
be mounted on the interior of the payload fairing or on adapter rings such as 
ESPA and CAP (see Microsatellites and Minisatellites  subsections). RocketPod™ 
uses mechanical and electrical interfaces flight proven on Ecliptic’s RocketCam™. 
Like t he P -Pod, ejection is achieved via a spring -loaded mechanism (Caldwell & 
Ridenoure, 2005) . 
In addition to deploying from a launch vehicle as a secondary payload, 
nanosatellites may also be deployed from the ISS via the Japanese  Experiment 
Module (JEM) Small Satellite Orbital Deployer (J -SSOD). Like previous deployers, 
ejection is achieved via a compressed spring mechanism and guide rails (IHI 
Aerosapce, 2012). 
As CubeSats grew in popularity, demand i ncreased for integration systems 
allowing for larger CubeSat payloads, as well as more CubeSats per launch. To 
accommodate this demand, a variety of 6U -capable deployers based on the P -POD 
were developed, including Wallops’ 6U deployer, Planetary Systems’ Canisterized 
Satellite Dispenser (CSD), Andrew’s 6U EZPOD, and NASA Ames’ NanoSat Launch 
Adapter System (NLAS). While these systems have yet to fly, all have been tested 
in a relevant environment and achieved a TRL of at least 6. As a secondary 
payload adapter system, not merely a deployer, NLAS has the additional 
advantage of carrying a large number of CubeSats, up to a total of 24U (Ames, 
2013).  
Like NLAS, the Naval Postgraduate School’s CubeSat launcher (NPSCul ) is capable 
of carrying large numbers (up to 24U) of CubeSats to orbit. While NLAS is a 
stand-alone adapter system, NPSCul requires an additional secondary payload 
adapter to interface with the launch vehicle. The capabilities of the 
aforementioned system s are highlighted in Table 57.  
  

--- PAGE 153 ---
 
 
142
 
 
Table 57: Examples of SoA 6U+ deployment systems. 
 
Technology 
Name Description Developer TRL Status Figures
Goddard 
Space Flight 
Center/ 
Wallops Flight 
Facility
(USA)
6
Vibration and 
deployment testing in 
relevant environmnet
Wallops 6U 
CubeSat 
deployer
CubeSat deployer 
capable of holding 6U 
CubeSats
Planetary 
Systems 
Corporation
(USA)
Canisterized 
Satellite 
Dispenser (CSD)
CubeSat dispenser 
capable of deploying 
3U and 6U payloads
6
Qualified to MIL-STD-
1540 level
NASA Ames 
Research 
Center
(USA)
6
Qualified using the 
General Environmental 
Verification Standards
Deploys 1, 3 and 6 U 
CubeSats, up to a total 
of 24U.
NLAS
Naval 
Postgraduate 
School
(USA)
Adapter used to carry 
8 P-PODs, or up to 24U 
volume of CubeSats
9
Deployed 11 CubeSats 
for OUTSat mission
NPSCul
10.2.2.2 Microsatellites!10R100!kg!
Payloads in the  microsatellite class have fewer dedicated integration systems. 
While a few adapters specifically targeted to this mass range exist, most payloads 
of this class must be designed to fit with minisatellite class integration systems. 
Indeed, integration syste ms specifically targeted towards microsatellites, such as 
the Aft Bulkhead Carrier  (ABC), often evolved out of unique situations.  
When redesigning the Atlas V Centaur upper stage pressure system, the Office of 
Space Launch (OSL) replaced three helium tanks  with two larger tanks leaving a 
volume 50.8  x 50.8 x 76.2 cm at the aft end of the upper stage. OSL seized the 
opportunity to convert this excess volume into secondary payload space. This 
location offers several advantages despite its proximity to the upp er stage 

--- PAGE 154 ---
143 
th
ruster, namely the secondary payload is completely isolated from the primary, 
thereby relaxing electromagnetic interference and contamination concerns of the 
primary payload. OSL designed the ABC (see Figure 55 ) to host payloads in this 
space. The adapter carries up to 80 kg by utilizing the plate and struts previously 
used to house the helium tank (Willcox, 2012).  
Figure 55: Aft Bulkhead Carrier (Willcox, 2012).  
Another adapter, originally used to house batteries, has been converted into 
secondary payload volume. The C -Adapter Platform (CAP) is a cantilevered 
platform capable of carrying up to 45 kg in a volume of 23  x 31 x 33 cm. The 
platform is attached to a C -adapter ring via a 20.3 cm clampband and is 
compatible with Atlas V and Delta IV launch vehicles (Szatkowski, 2013) . C-rings, 
mounted in the forward adapter of the Centaur upper stage, a re essentially large 
aluminum rings used as an interface between payload integration systems and 
ground support equipment (ULA, 2010). 
Table 58: Microsatellite secondary payload adapters. 


--- PAGE 155 ---
 
 
144
 
 
10.
2.2.3 Minisatellites!100R180!kg!
To use additional payload space on  the EELV, the Air Force Research Laboratory 
Space Vehicles Directorate (AFRL/VS) contracted Moog CSA Engineering to 
develop what has become known as an ESPA ring, or EELV Secondary Payload 
Adapter. The original ESPA was designed to carry a 6,800 kg primary pa yload and 
up to six 180 kg secondary payloads (Goodwin & Wegner, 2001) . Although 
initially designed to be compatible with the Atlas V and Delta IV launch vehicles, 
the adapter is also compatible with the Taurus II launch vehicl e. Additionally, 
SpaceX has recently made an agreement with Spaceflight Inc. to host secondary 
payloads using Spaceflight’s Secondary Payload System (SSPS), which has at its 
core an ESPA ring (Bergin, 2012). 
ESPA is a ring of 7 070 T7451 aluminum with six equally spaced 38 cm diameter 
bolt circles used to attach six secondary payloads. ESPA sits between the launch 
vehicle upper stage and the primary payload, where rings may be stacked to 
accommodate more secondary payloads. Each secondary is allowed to occupy a 
maximum volume of 61  x 61 x 96.5 cm with a 50.8 cm center of gravity 
requirement (Goodwin & Wegner, 2001) . The deployment is left to the payload 
designers, but the ejection system and the payload together must fit within the 
size and mass constraints. Any payload that fits within these constraints and is 
compatible with the 38 cm bolt circles may ride as a seco ndary on ESPA, 
including the CubeSat deployers discussed previously. In addition to providing a 
physical link to the launch vehicle, the ESPA system also accommodates an 
electrical interface between launch vehicle and payload to provide power.  
Moog CSA als o developed the ESPA Six Unit Mount (SUM), which allows for the 
addition of up to 12 3U satellites. ESPA SUM makes use of the interior portion of 
the adapter ring to house either two 3U P -PODs or one 6U deployer behind each 
38.1 cm port, in addition to the  six 180 kg payloads (Moog, 2013) . CubeSat 
deployers may be mounted internally or externally as shown in Figure  56. If 
mounted externally, then a total of 24 3U CubeSats may be deployed from the 
ESPA SUM, using CSD and P -POD deployers.  

--- PAGE 156 ---
145 
Figure 56: (Left) ESPA SUM with interior mounted CubeSats and (right) exterior mounted (Marin, n.d.).  
To support payloads on the Minotaur launch vehicle, Orbital Sciences 
Corporation developed the Multiple Payload Adapter Plate (MPAP), a flat plate 
adapter capable of holding up to four 180 kg payloads in a volume of 90.2  x 78.1 
x 61 cm (Orbital Sciences, 2013) . Plate adapters are 
used in conjunction with other payload adapters to 
increase the overall secondary payload space. Moog 
CSA has developed a similar adapter, known as the 
Spiderman Adapter, to interfa ce with ESPA rings. The 
adapter, seen in Figure , holds two 180 kg payloads 
(Pendleton, et al., n.d.) . MPAP, ESPA, and ot her 
minisatellite payload adapter systems can be seen in 
Table 59. 
Figure 57: Two payloads attached 
to an ESPA ring via the 
Spiderman adapter (Pendleton, et 
al., n.d.). 

--- PAGE 157 ---
 
 
146 
 
Table 59: Minisatellite payload adapter systems. 
 
Technology Description Developer TRL Status FiguresName
Payload interface which 9Moog CSAESPA Ring carries up to six 180 kg Enabled STP-1 mission (USA)secondary payloads in 2007
6
ESPA payload adapter NASA LSP provided 
used to carry up to Moog CSA guidance to qualify ESPA SUM twelve 3U satellites per (USA) prototype based on 
ring generic space flight 
parameters
Multiple Orbital Minotaur adapter 9Payload Sciences capable of holding up Successfully used on Adapter Plate Corporationto four 180 kg payloads STP-S26 mission in 2010(MPAP) (USA)
Adapter plate integrates 6Spiderman flat with ESPA enabling two Moog CSA Successfully tested plate adapter additional 180 kg (USA) under flight conditionspayload
Capable of carrying one Secondary Space Access 200 kg primary 9Payload Technologies payload, 90 kg Successfully flown on Adapter and and ATSBsecondary payloads, Falcon 1, used to Separation (USA and and up to 24 1U deploy RazakSATSystem (SPASS) Malaysia)CubeSats
10.2.3 Separation+Systems+
While many separation systems like the POD deployers  make use of a 
compressed spring mechanism, band systems are also quite common. Lightband 
and Marman clamp separation systems are widely used, particularly for larger 
spacecraft.  
Lightband is a motorized separation system that ranges from 20.3 cm to 96.5 cm 
in diameter. Smaller Lightband systems are used to deploy ESPA class satellites, 
while larger variations may be used to separate the entire ESPA ring itself. 
Lightband’s motorized separation system eliminates the need for pyrotechnic 

--- PAGE 158 ---
 
 
147 
 
separatio
n, and thus deployment results in lower shock and no post -separation 
debris (PSC, 2013). 
Marman band separation systems use energy stored in a clamp band, often along 
with springs, to achieve separation. The Marman band is tensioned to h old the 
payload in place. Upon severing the connecting bolt, via bolt cutters or 
pyrotechnic bolts, the stored energy is rapidly released and the payload 
separates (Lazansky, 2012) . Sierra Nevada produces a Marman band separation 
system known as Qwksep, which uses a series of separation springs to help 
deploy the payload after clamp band release. Qwksep is available in two sizes, 
38.1 cm for ESPA applications and 61 cm for ESPA Grande applications (Stavast, 
et al., n.d.).  
Other products making use of similar technology are available, but the products 
in Table 60 are representative of the SoA. Depending on the launch vehicle, 
separation systems may already be in place and available to secondary payloads.  
Table 60: Band separation systems. 
 
Technology Description          De    veloper TRL Status FiguresName
Planetary System used to 9Motorized Systems separate payloads Has successfully flown Lightband (MLB) Corporationfrom launch vehicles on over 30 missions(USA)
Clamp band 6Sierra Nevada separation system for Significant testing has Qwksep CorporationESPA and ESPA Grande been conducted to (USA)class satellites verify system
10.2.4 Launch+Integration+Services+for+Secondary+Small+Spacecraft+Payloads+
The sharing of a launch between a secondary small -satellite and a primary 
payload is not considered to be standard and thus the services required for such 
rideshare implement ation are non-standard as well. Generally, the launch vehicle 
(LV) customer (not the LV manufacturer) decides whether secondary smallsat 
payloads will share a ride with a primary payload and if so, how these secondary 

--- PAGE 159 ---
 
 
148 
 
smallsats are dispensed. In most cases , the LV customer is the primary payload; 
however, there are cases where a program or integration company can determine 
rideshare possibilities  (Sanchez, 2013) . More flexibility may be available to 
secondary payloads that are funded through such a program, although the 
mission schedule is generally decided by the primary payload.  
Typical “standard” rideshare integration services are general services provided 
by these integration companies that focus on LV integrations and do no t vary 
due to mission requirements of the primary payload. Standardized services 
include system testing, engineering development support, hardware of the 
dispenser, and necessary integration such as smallsat-to-dispenser and 
dispenser-to-LV.  
Rideshare int egration services considered to be “non -standard” may depend 
heavily on the primary payload and can include de -integration (e.g., executing a 
separation maneuver), mission and science -specific services, special analyses 
related to hardware and integration services, and isolated venting, shock, 
vibration, and thermal environmental control.  
Examples of launch integration companies include Spaceflight Services, Tyvak 
Nano-Satellite Systems LLC, and TriSept Corporation . 
Spaceflight Services  provides routine access to space for deployed and hosted 
smallsat payloads by using published commercial pricing, standard interfaces, 
and frequent flight opportunities. They have launched payloads on multiple LVs 
for NASA and industry (see Figure 58 for a visual representation of a smallsat 
ejection from a dispenser) . Specific integration services provided include 
engineering analysis, smallsat -to-dispenser and LV integration, flight service, 
coordination of launch and on -orbit services, safety audits, cu stomer manifest 
planning, and standard interface options for smallsats, including CubeSat (e.g., 
6U, 12U and 24U) from P -POD systems (Spaceflight Services LLC, 2013) . 

--- PAGE 160 ---
 
 
149
 
 
 
Figure 56: Spaceflight Services depiction of Smallsat ejections from dispenser in low -Earth orbit 
(LEO)
 
(Spaceflight Services LLC, 2013) . 
Tyvak Nano- Satellite Systems LLC provides smallsat space vehicle products and 
launch integration service s such as engineering analysis, integration of complex 
smallsat (e.g. CubeSat) subsystems, smallsat-to-LV interface control 
documentation, verification of requirements, and payload certification  (Tyvak 
Nano-Satellite Systems LLC, 2 013). Tyvak has the experience of 11 successful 
launches with five launches in the planning and development stages. Other 
integration service capabilities include: smallsat-to-dispenser and LV integration, 
dispenser design, fabrication, flight certifi cation, testing (including shock, 
vibrations, thermal, and thermal vacuum), launch and general mission 
operations, and launch coordination between US and foreign entities.  
TriSept Corporation  serves as the lead integrator for the Operationally 
Responsive Space (ORS) Office. TriSept Corporation  has smallsat rideshare 
integration experience with NASA, Department of Defense (DoD), and industry, 
providing integration of multiple smallsats (e.g. CubeSat from P -POD) on the 
Athena LV
 and performing integration management of 45 unique smallsat 
payloads as part of the ORS -3 and ORS -4 missions  (TriSept Corporation, 2013) ; 
see Figure  for an example of a primary spacecraft integrated with a dispenser 
filled with secondary smallsats. Specific integration services include secondary 
payload integration, interface testing, smallsat -dispenser and primary -to-LV 

--- PAGE 161 ---
 
 
150
 
 
inte
gration, engineering analysis, and payload certification  (TriSept Corporation, 
2013). 
 
Figure 59: Example of primary payload integrated with smallsat secondary payloads stowed in 
dispenser
 
(TriSept Corporation, 2013). 
10.2.5 Isolated+Environmental+Control+Possibilities+
Services and technologies related to isolating potentially critical environments 
for secondary smallsat payloads (such as venting, shock, vibrations, and thermal ) 
should be considered . To date, there have not been enough missions to properly 
define these environments for each combination of LV -to-smallsat dispenser 
system and thus this environmental information provided by LV manufacturers 
is applicable for the entire payload, not just the secondary. However, this does 
not mean the aforementioned environments are  not available for isolation on or 
within a secondary payload. There are options for secondary payloads that allow 
for reduced shock and vibrations; two examples are the aforemention ed shock 
ring from Spaceflight Services and Moog CSA's Softride products: Shock Ring and 
a Tuned Mass Damper , respectively (Moog Inc., 2013 ; see Figure 60 ). These 
features are independent of the primary payload and LV, meaning the secondary 

--- PAGE 162 ---
 
 
151
 
 
payload must sh ow up to the launch site equipped with such features. Another 
service provided by Moog CSA is component isolation, which can be potentially 
valuable to instruments that require lower vibrations compared to the rest of the 
system. Isolated thermal control is perhaps more difficult to achieve, considering 
secondary smallsat payloads are generally attached to the LV's upper stage, 
located within the fairing with the primary payload. Isolated thermal control 
options are discussed more in th e next section.    
 
              
 
Figure 60: Moog CSA's shock ring (left) and tuned mass damper (right), used for both shock 
isolation and reduced vibrations for secondary smallsat payloads (Moog Inc., 2013). 
10.3 On+the+Horizon+
10.3.1+Launch+Integration+Services+for+Secondary+Smallsat+Payloads+
As previously mentioned, the isolated thermal control appears to be a relatively 
difficult service for launch integration companies to provide. There have been 
paints in development, and some already de veloped (AZ Technology, Inc., 2008) , 
that coat the skin of a smallsat to effectively alter its thermal environment, 
independent of the primary payload located within the same upper stage fairing. 
Additionally, smallsats can take advantage of multi -layer insulation (MLI) to 
create an isolated thermal environment. Many such MLI shielding combinations 
exist such as aluminum and black Kapton, aluminum and glass cloth, gold and 
polyimide, etc. (Multek Corporation, 2013)  and can be used in conjunction with 
the aforementioned paints, increasing the thermal control available to smallsats. 
10.3.2 Launch+Vehicles+
10.3.2.1!Primary!Payload!
The future holds the most promise for primary payload s launched  on small and 
cheap boosters . Many of the prime advantages of a small satellite— including 

--- PAGE 163 ---
 
 
152
 
 
hi
gh iteration and replacement rates or large constellations — are not realizable 
launching only as space allows on much larger, slower, traditional missions.  
Several small launchers currently in development are very promising but at a low 
TRL. One of the most serious programs currently in development is the Defense 
Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) Airborne Launch Assist Space 
Access (ALASA) program. This progra m aims to produce a launcher capable of 
boosting on th e order of approximately 45 kg into LEO for less than $1M 
including range support costs. It also aims to greatly simplify the launch process 
by eliminating or mitigating several disadvantages of fixed-base launch es 
(including weather delays, large capital infrastructure costs, and limited 
inclination accessibility ) through airborne launch es. The program supports 
advanced technology development including stable propellant production and 
better mission planning to support small launchers (DARPA, n.d.) . ALASA 
includes Boeing, Lockheed Martin, Northrop Grumman, Space Information 
Laboratories, and Virgin Galactic as partners  (Messier, 2012). 
As a member of the DARPA ALASA program and with a separate airborne carrier 
vehicle already extensively developed to host manned suborbital launches, Virgin 
Galactic and The Spaceship Company are at the forefront of small launcher 
design. The Spaceship Com pany is a manufacturing joint venture between Virgin 
Galactic, which organizes launch customers, and Scaled Composites, which 
designs the vehicles. These companies are developing the LauncherOne, which is 
designed to deliver a 225 kg payload to low -inclination LEO , or 100 kg to Sun-
synchronous LEO. It will be launched off of the WhiteKnightTwo carrier aircraft 
(Virgin Galactic, n.d. ; see Figure 61).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 164 ---
153 
Figure 61: Artist's conception of the Virgin Galactic LauncherOne and WhiteKnightTwo 
NASA itself is also working to advance small launchers. NASA Launch Services 
(NLS) at the Kennedy Space Center is currently soliciting inform ation for a 
potential “Nano -Sat Launcher” as part of its NLS Enabling eXploration & 
Technology (NEXT) program. This launcher is meant to launch at least a 15 kg 3U 
CubeSat into a 425 km orbit a t inclinations between 0 and 98 ° no later than 
December 15, 2016. This program is limited to companies with fewer than 1,000 
employees to encourage small business innovation outside of traditional means 
of procurement (Foust, 2013). 

--- PAGE 165 ---
 
 
154 
 
Table 61: On the horizon primary launchers. 
Technology Description Developer TRL Status FiguresName
5Multiple contracts to Current phase (design Lockheed Martin, DARPA; risk reduction) focused Boeing, Virgin contractor not on system design and ALASA Program Galactic, Ventions yet selected technology LLC, Space (USA) development; Phase 2 Information will include build and Laboratories LLC flight tests
Air-launched, three-
stage orbital vehicle 5
with 100 lb/45 kg Various components Boeing small Boeingpayload now in already flown, but no launch vehicle (USA)development larger scale integration 
supported by DARPA yet
ALASA program
Air-launched, single- Generation 4stage rocket Orbit Launch Two-year CRADA with delivering ~45 kg (100 GOLauncher 2 Services, Space AFRL ongoing for lb) to LEO of up to 400 Propulsion computational and km with inclinations Group experimental tasksfrom 0 to 98.7 degrees
5
WK2 carrier vehicle 
development largely Air-launched two- Virgin GalacticLauncherOne complete; ongoing stage booster (USA) testing of likely hybrid 
rocket for SS2 
suborbital manned 
China 
Aerospace 
Science and Long March Smallest launch Technology Micro Launch vehicle planned of LM ?Corporation, N/AVehicle (LM- family; other details UnknownChina National MLV) unknown Space 
Adm inistration
(China)
3Suborbital space Mark I in development, plane with dorsal- XCOR but Mark III necessary Lynx launched small Aerospace for orbital launch orbital booster, 650 (USA) would be a redesigned kg to LEO new vehicle
Brazilian Space 
Agency (AEB), Microsat 150 kg to 300 km German Space 4Launch Vehicle orbit; 3 solid stages Agency (DLR) Projected launch in 2015(VLM) (Brazil/ 
Germany)


--- PAGE 166 ---
 
N/A
155 
 
5
NASA SBIR 08-2 S4.01-
8692; will be at TRL 6 by 
completion of contract
22.7 kg to LEO; 
NO2/Rubber hybrid 
rocket
Whittinghill 
Aerospace
(USA)
Minimum cost 
launch vehicle
Pump-fed, 2-stage 
nano launch vehicle 
for low-cost on 
demand placement of 
cube and nano-
satellites into LEO
4
NASA SBIR 12-1 E1.02-
9215
Nano launch 
vehicle
Ventions
(USA)
Nanosat launch 
vehicle (a.k.a 
Garvey 10/250)
Orbital nanosat 
launcher with 10 kg to 
250 km orbit
Garvey 
Spacecraft
(USA)
4
NASA SBIR  12-1 E1.02-
9091 
Three-stage vehicle 
with 30-50 kg 
(variants 5 and 7, 
respectively) to 
circular polar orbit at 
310 km
5
Multiple missions on 
manifest for 2013, but 
no test flight yet; 
multiple components 
tested
Interorbital 
Systems
(USA)
Neptune
NAMMO, 
Norwegian 
Space Centre, 
ESA
(Norway)
10 kg to 350 km polar 
LEO; evolved 
sounding rocket 
design
3
First launch planned 
for 2020
North Star 
Launch Vehicle
Swiss Space 
Systems (S3)
(Switzerland)
3
Company launched in 
March 2013
S3 vehicle 
(unnamed)
250 kg to LEO, air-
launched, three-stage 
25 kg to 750 km orbit 
at 28.5 degree 
inclination; 24 hours 
from storage to 
launch ready; Tridyne 
pressure-fed engine 
with LOX/CH4
5
Ground engine test, 
suborbital flight test, 
and orbital flight test 
in summer 2014
U.S. Army; 
Contractor not 
yet selectedSWORDS
 
 
10.3.2.2!Secondary!Payload !
One advantage of the secondary launch market is that market forces from both 
small and large spacecraft can collectively drive development and cost -reduction. 
Even advances in large, heavy- lift boosters like NASA’s Space Launch System or 
SpaceX’s Falcon Heavy can help to open space to more parties. The Falcon Heavy 

--- PAGE 167 ---
 
 
156
 
 
is
 one of the most promising in this area. Projected to cost just over $1K/kg, the 
Falcon Heavy will be one of the cheapest vehicles on the market while throwing 
53,000 kg into LEO. Innovative features like propellant cross -feed from the side -
mounted boosters to the core for payloads over 45,000 kg help to maximize 
performance and efficiency. Advances in reusability or Merlin rocket engine 
enhancements will be shared across the Falcon line (Space Exploration 
Technologies, 2013) . 
10.3.3 Payload+Adapters+and+Deployment+
10.3.3.1!CubeSat!Deployers!
Several CubeSat integration systems are under development to support increased 
demand for CubeSat launches. Planetary Systems is developing 12U and 27U 
versions of CSD allowing for larger, more complex CubeSat payloads (Williams, 
2013). Spaceflight Services is developing DecaPOD to enable more CubeSat 
secondary payloads per launch. DecaPOD holds up to ten 3U CubeSats and is 
compatible with Spaceflight’s Secondary Payload System (SSPS). Two DecaPODs 
fit on each of SSPS’s five ports, allowing for a total of 100 3U CubeSats if fully 
loaded (Spaceflight, 2012) . 
Table 62: Examples of “on the horizon” small spacecraft deployers . 
Technology 
Name Developer
Description TRL Status Figures
Planetary 
Systems 
Corporation
(USA)
3
Analyzed with finite 
element model under 
relevant conditions
Canisterized 
Satellite 
Dispenser (CSD)
CubeSat dispenser 
capable of deploying 
12U and 27U Payloads
System capable of 
transporting and 
deploying 10 3U 
CubeSats
Spaceflight, 
Inc.
(USA)
5
Deployment subsystem 
has successfully flown
DecaPOD
 


==================================================
SECTION: Structures, Materials, and Mechanisms (Pages 168-197)
==================================================

--- PAGE 168 ---
157 
10.3.3.2 Adapter!Rings!
A scaled version of the ESPA ring is in develo pment, known as Small Launch 
ESPA. Small Launch ESPA is designed to be compatible with Minotaur IV, Taurus 
and Delta II launch vehicles. It is particularly well suited to host CubeSat and 
sub-ESPA class payloads (Maly, et al., 2009). As mentioned previously, fewer 
adapters exist to serve the microsatellite class. However, Small Launch ESPA will 
greatly increase interface options for microsatellites, especially by increasing the 
number of compatible launch vehicles.  
Spaceflight S ervices is developing an ESPA based adapter system known as SSPS, 
to be compatible with intermediate class launch vehicles such as Falcon 9, 
Antares and EELV. At its core the system has an ESPA Grande ring, a five port 
ESPA ring capable of carrying up to 3 00 kg payloads per port, either standalone 
spacecraft or CubeSat deployers. What is unique about SSPS is the inclusion of an 
avionics suite, power supply, and batteries to supply power to hosted payloads, 
provide telemetry to ground stations, and provide g eneral mission management 
(Spaceflight, Inc., 2012) . The ability to host secondary payloads after launch 
vehicle separation could greatly increase the mission lifetime of secondary 
payloads, and may even enable new missions.  
Table 63: Examples of “on the horizon” small spacecraft adapter rings. 
Technology Description Developer TRL Status FiguresName
Carries up to six 100 3
Small Launch kg payloads on Moog CSA Analyzed with finite 
ESPA Minotaur IV and Delta (USA) element model under 
II launch conditions
5Spaceflight Spaceflight, Adapter ring and Secondary Hosts up to five 300 Inc. deployment Payload System kg spacecraft (USA) subsystems have (SSPS) successfully flown


--- PAGE 169 ---
 
 
158 
 
10.3.3.2 Spa
ce!Tugs!
One of the main disadvantages of riding as a secondary payload is the inability to 
launch into your desired orbit. In the future secondary payloads ma y no longer 
need to be limited by the primary payload orbit. By using a space tug, or some on 
orbit servicing vehicle, secondary payloads will be able to maneuver into desired 
orbits.  
Moog CSA is currently developing the ESPA Orbital Maneuvering System (OMS) to 
fill this role. OMS uses an ESPA adapter ring as the base of a free flying 
spacecraft. The ring is designed to separate from the launch vehicle and use its 
own propulsion and avionics to navigate to desired orbits (Maly, et al., 2009) .  
Spaceflight Services is developing a similar technology known as the SHERPA 
Tug, or Shuttle Expendable Rocket for Payload Augmentation. The vehicle has 
SSPS at its base, but includes solar panels to provide up to 25O  W for hosted 
payloads, and a propulsion system for orbital maneuvering. Two propulsion 
systems exist, one contains a monopropellant thruster capable of delivering up 
to 400 m/s deltaV, and one contains a bi -propellant thruster capable of 
delivering up to 2,200 m/s deltaV (Spaceflight, Inc., 2012). 
Table 64: On the Horizon for small spacecraft for Space tugs . 
Technology 
Name Description Developer TRL Status Figures
Orbital 
Maneuvering 
System 
Propulsion system is 
integrated into ESPA 
ring allowing adapter 
to act as an 
independent 
spacecraft
Moog CSA
(USA)
5
Adapter ring and 
deployment 
subsystems have 
successfully flown
SHERPA Tug
Orbital servicing 
vehicle capable of 
changing secondary 
payload orbit and 
host payloads for up 
to one year
Spaceflight, 
Inc.
(USA)
5
Adapter ring and 
deployment 
subsystems have 
successfully flown
 

--- PAGE 170 ---
 
 
159 
 
10.3.4 Launch+Integration+Services+for+Secondary+Smallsat+Payloads+
As mentioned in this se ction's state of the art counterpart, isolated thermal 
control appears to be a relatively difficult service for launch integration 
companies to provide. There have been paints in development (and some already 
developed) that coat the skin of a smallsat to effectively a lter its thermal 
environment, independent of the primary payload located within the same upper 
stage fairing. Additionally, smallsat can take advantage of MLI to create an 
isolated thermal environment. Many such MLI shielding combinations exist (e.g., 
gold-gold, platinum -glass, etc.) and can be used in conjunction with the 
aforementioned paints, increasing the thermal control available to smallsats. 
10.4 Conclusion+
A wide variety of integration and deployment systems exists to provide rideshare 
opportunities for small satellites on existing launch vehicles. While leveraging 
excess payload space will continue to be profitable into the future, dedicated 
launch vehicles  and new integration systems are needed to fully utilize the 
advantages provided by small satellites. Dedicated launch vehicles may be used 
to take advantage of rapid iteration and mission design flexibility, enabling small 
satellites to dictate mission pa rameters. New integration systems will greatly 
increase the mission envelope of small satellites riding as secondary payloads. 
Advanced systems may be used to host secondary payloads on orbit to increase 
mission lifetime, expand mission capabilities, and e nable orbit maneuvering. As 
we move into the future these technologies may yield exciting advances in space 
capabilities and understanding.  
 
10.5 References+
Ames, N.: NASA-Built Nanosatellite Launch Adapter System Ready for Flight. 
[Online] 2013. Available at:             
http://www.nasa.gov/centers/ames/news/2013/NLAS -ready-for-flight.html - 
.Ug8RzZLVBsk [Accessed 16 August 2013].  

--- PAGE 171 ---
 
 
160
 
 
Atkinson, N.: The Atlas V with LRO and LCROSS at the pad. [Online] 2009. 
Available at: http://www.universetoday.com/32779/lrolcross -ready-for-launch-
to-the-moon/lro-left-vif1s/ 
Bergin, C.: SpaceX deal boosts Falcon 9′ s secondary payload manifest. [Online] 
2012. 
Available at: http://www.nasaspaceflight.com/2012/06/spacex -deal-falcon-9s-
secondary-payload-manifest/ [Accessed 16 Aug 2013].  
Brügge, N., n.d. : Super-Strypi >SPARK. [Online] Available at: 
http://www.b14643.de/Spacerockets_2/United_States_7/SPARK/Versions/SPARK
.htm 
[Accessed 19 August 2013].  
Caldwell, D., Ridenoure, R.: RocketPod™: A Method for Launching CubeSat-Class 
Payloads on ELVs and Spa cecraft. North Logan, UT, s.n.  2005. 
DARPA, n.d.: Airborne Launch Assist Space Access (ALASA). [Online]  
Available at: 
http://www.darpa.mil/Our_Work/TTO/Programs/Airborne_Launch_Assist_Space
_Access_(ALASA).aspx  [Accessed 18 August 2013].  
David, L.: A Space Aloha: Hawaii Gears Up for First Satellite Launch. [Online] 
2013. 
Available at: http://www.space.com/20849 -hawaii-small-satellite-launch.html 
Foust, J.: NASA seeks to buy a dedicated nanosatellite launch. [Online] 2013. 
Available at: http://www.newspacejournal.com/2013/08/14/nasa -seeks-to-buy-a-
dedicated-nanosatellite-launch/ 
Goodwin, J., Wegner, P.: Evolved Expendable Launch Vehicle Secondary Payload 
Adapter. Albuquerque, NM, s.n.  2001. 
IHI Aerosapce: JEM Small Satellite Orbital Deployer (J -SSOD) Fitch Check Case 
Instruction Manual, Tomioka: IHI Aerospace co., Ltd.  2012. 

--- PAGE 172 ---
161 
Kramer, H. J.: CubeSat Concept. [Online] 2012. 
Available at: https://directory.eoportal.org/web/eoportal/satellite -missions/c-
missions/CubeSat -concept [Accessed 16 August 2013].  
Lan, W.: Poly PIcosatellite Orbital  Deployer MK III ICD. California Polytechnic State 
University. San Luis Obispo, 2007. 
Lazansky, C.: Refinement of a Low -Shock Separation System. s.l., Jet Propulsion 
Laboratory, 2012. 
Maly, J. R., Stavast, V. M., Sanford, G. E. , Evert, M. E.: Adapter Ring for Small 
Satellites on Responsive Launch Vehicles. Los Angeles, CA, s.n.  2009. 
Marin, C., n.d.: Evolved Expendable Launch Vehicle (EELV) Secondary Payload 
Adapter (ESPA) Six Unit Mount (SUM), s.l.: LSP Mission Integration, Kennedy Space 
Center. 
Messier, D.: DARPA Awards 6 Small Airborne Launch Vehicle Contracts. [Online] 
2012. 
Available at: http://www.parabolicarc.com/2012/07/02/darpa -awards-6-small-
launch-vehicle-contracts/ 
Moog: Other Adapters. [Online] 2013. 
Available at: http://www.csaengineering.com/products -services/other-adapters/ 
[Accessed 16 August 2013].  
NASA: IRIS Reaches Orbit. [Online] 2013. 
Available at: http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/iris/launch/index.html - 
.UhIFupLvvh5 
Orbital Sciences: Fact Sheet. [Online] 2013. 
Available at: http://www.orbital.com/NewsInfo/Publications/Pegasus_fact.pdf  
Orbital Sciences: Minotaur IV V VI User's Guide . Orbital Sciences Corporation.  
Dulles, VA, 2013. 
Orbital Sciences: Taurus. [Online] 2013. Available at: 
http://www.orbital.com/SpaceLaunch/Taurus/  

--- PAGE 173 ---
162 
Pendleton, S., Basile, J. , Fowler, E., n.d.: Low-Cost Flat Plate Adapters for Dual 
Primary Payload Missions. CSA Engineering Inc.  Mountain View, CA . 
PSC: 2000785 Rev D User's Manual for Mark II Lightband . Planetary Systems 
Corporation. Silver Spring, MD, 2013. 
Space Exploration Technologies : Falcon Heavy. [Online] 2013. 
Available at: http://www.spacex.com/falcon -heavy 
Spaceflight, Inc.: Spaceflight, Inc. Secondary Payload Users Guide . Spaceflight, Inc. 
Tukwila, WA, 2012. 
Spaceflight: Spaceflight Unveils Its DecaPOD CubeSat Deployer. [Online] 2012. 
Available at: http://spaceflightservices.com/spaceflight -unveils-its-decapod-
CubeSat-deployer/ [Accessed 23 August 2013].  
Stavast, V., Lazansky, C. , Helgesen, B., n.d.: SNC Qwksep - A Simple, Reliable, Stiff 
and Low-Shock Separation System for Small Sat Missions . s.l.: IEEE Xplore. 
Szatkowski, J.: ULA Rideshare Smallsat Missions for Lunar & Inter -Planetary 
Exploration. Cal Tech, CA, s.n.  2013. 
Taylor, B.: The University of Hawai'i Innovation Initiative. [Online] 2013. 
Available at: http://www.hawaii.edu/offices/op/innovation/taylor.pdf  
Technologies, Space Exploration : Falcon 9. [Online] 2013. 
Available at: http://www.spacex.com/falcon9  
ULA: Atlas V Launch Services User's Guide . Centennial, CO: ULA.  2010. 
United Launch Alliance : Technical Summary. [Online] 2013. 
Available at: 
http://www.ulalaunch.com/site/docs/product_cards/AV_product_card.pdf  
Virgin Galactic, n.d. : Performance and Specification. [Online]  
Available at: http://www.virgingalactic.com/launcherOne/performance -and-
specification/ [Accessed 18 August 2013].  

--- PAGE 174 ---
 
 
163
 
 
Wi
llcox, T.: Atlas V Aft Bulkhead Carrier Rideshare System. AIAA/USU. North 
Logan, UT, 2012. 
Williams, R.: Containerized Satellite Dispenser (CSD) Data Sheet . Planetary 
Systems Corp. Silver Spring MD, 2013. 
 
 
  

--- PAGE 175 ---
 
 
164 
 
11. GROUND SYSTEMS AND OPERATIONS 
11.1 Introduction+
11.1.1 General+ground+system+setup+
In the general case, a ground system consists of a network of ground stations 
and different control centers such as the Spacecraft Operations Control Center 
(SOCC), the Payload Operations Control Center (POCC) and the Mission Control 
Center (MCC). These el ements may or may not be located at the same 
geographical location depending on the type, size and complexity of the mission. 
In all cases the different elements are supposed to work together with the overall 
goal to support the spacecraft and the users of  the data generated by the 
mission.  
Figure 62 shows the functional relationship between the space segment and the 
ground segment of a space mission. The ground segment is made up of the users 
of the mission data and the ground system, which has two functions: (i) 
supporting the space segment (spacecraft and payload), and (ii) relaying the 
mission data to the users. To support the spacecraft, the ground system must 
command and control the bus and the payload, monitor their health, track the 
spacecraft to determine its orbital position, and determine the spacecraft’s 
attitude using ADCS sensor information (for more information on ground 
systems, refer to Chapter 15 of Larson & Wertz, 2004).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 62: Functional relationship between space segment and ground segment (Larson & 
Wertz, 2004) 
Ground'System
Spacecraft'and'Payload'
Support
Relay'of'Mission'Data
Data'
Users Spacecraft
Command'
Requests
Mission
Data
Command'&'
Tracking
Data
Te le me tr y
Mission
Data
Ground'Segment Space'Segment
(='ground'stations'+'control'centers)

--- PAGE 176 ---
 
 
165 
 
11.1.2 Differences+with+small+spacecraft+ground+systems+
The ground systems architecture for small spacecraft missions often takes a 
different fo rm compared to the classical architectures used for large spacecraft 
missions. The low -cost parad igm shift mentioned in Section 1  and the 
accessibility of COTS technology for the space sector have not only changed how 
designers think about a spacecraft but  also how a ground systems architecture 
can be conceived. Both the ground systems of small spacecraft missions and the 
demographics of the data user community differ from the common scheme of  
Figure 62. An overview of such potential differences (shown in Table 65) 
highlights the extent to which CubeSat ground systems can differ from their 
classical counterparts. Due to length limitations, the entries of Table 65 are not 
discussed in detail: refer to Schmidt (2011)  for an exhaustive treatise on the 
characteristics of small spacecraft ground systems.  
Table 65: Fundamental differences between a small spacecraft ground system and classical 
ground systems for large spacecraft (see §2.2 of Schmidt [2011] for more information ). 
Classical Ground System  CubeSat Ground System 
Legacy systems New systems 
High-cost, high complexity Low-cost (COTS), low complexity  
Clear distinction between mission Standalone system: MCC, SOCC, POCC 
control and ground station network  and principal ground station are often 
aggregated into a single entity  
Supports a small to moderate number Capability to support a large number of 
of different missions in parallel. missions sequentially. O nly one 
Different types of antennas and antenna, therefore no capability to 
hardware enable capability of communicate with more than one 
communicating with more than one spacecraft simultaneously 
spacecraft simultaneously 
Supports missions with long lifetimes  Supports missions with short lifetimes  
Provides high quality of service Does not guarantee high quality of 
(security, reliability, etc.)  service 
Commercial or institutional operators  Typically academic or amateur 
operators 
Hierarchical topology with a small Peer-to-peer topology with typically a 
number of nodes distributed large number of ad -hoc nodes 
strategically around the globe  participating on a voluntary basis  

--- PAGE 177 ---
166 
 
No flexibility in the use of the Many missions use nearly the same 
topology’s individual nodes  frequency bands, so individual nodes in 
the topology may be exchangeable 
S-band and higher frequencies Typically UHF and VHF 
CCSDS based long- haul communication TCP/IP based communication protocols 
protocols 
Big dishes Small dishes or no dish at all (Ham -type 
antennas) 
Support high power (> 40W)  spacecraft Support low power (< 5W)  spacecraft 
Large bandwidth, data rate and Small bandwidth, data rate and 
throughput throughput 
Large software requirements  Small software requirements  
Large number of facilities and Small number of facilities and 
personnel with much expertise  personnel with usually less expertise  
Figure 63 illustrates the variety in ground system architectures that can be used 
for small spacecraft missions. Image (a) shows an example of a classical ground 
system setup, i.e. the Air Force Satellite Control Network (AFSCN). T he topology 
of the AFSCN is hierarchical, with 12 nodes organized around a central master 
node at Schriever AFB, CO. Image (b) depicts the distributed network of ground 
stations used for the PhoneSat project ( http://www.phonesat.org ). PhoneSat was 
supported by 1,343 volunteer nodes organized in a distributed topology. Image 
(c) shows an example of a common small spacecraft ground segment topology — a 
single node consisting of a university ground station and control room . 

--- PAGE 178 ---
 
 
167 
 
 
 
Figure 63: Various ground system architectures encountered in small spacecraft missions. (a) 
depicts the US Air Force Satellite Control Network (AFSCN) as an example of a conventional 
hierarchical ground system setup (image credit: USAF). (b) shows  the 1343 nodes that 
participated on a voluntary basis in the distributed ground system architecture of Phonesat 
(image credit: http://www.phonesat.org ). (c) illustrates the case where a smallsat mission is 
managed and operated using a single ground statio n only. 
The principal driver for a small spacecraft ground system is cost. To lower costs, 
a typical SoA  ground system merges the three conventional control centers —
MCC, SOCC, and POCC — into a single unit positioned in one geographical 
location. The whole mission is often managed from a single lab room modified 
for that purpose. The ground station is either a fixed or mobile COTS antenna 
connected to mission control using standard cabling. Common frequency bands 
are VHF, UHF and sometimes S -band at the high er frequency limit. Tracking, 
Telemetry and Command ( TT&C) for both platform and payload is managed by a 
single desktop computer.  

--- PAGE 179 ---
 
 
168
 
 
11.2 State+of+the+Art+
11.2.1+Ground+Systems+
Figure 64 compares the size and scope of typical large and small spacecraft 
ground systems.  
  
  
 
Figure 64: Differences in size and scope between large (left -hand side) and small spacecraft 
ground systems (right-hand side). Top left: NASA’s Deep Space Network (DSN) ground station in 
Goldstone, CA. Top right: GENSO roof -top ground station at the International Space University, 
Strasbourg, France. Bottom left: NASA MCC at JSC, Houston, TX. Bottom right: Student operating 
the small spacecraft MCC at the University of Santa Clara, CA. 
In Table 66, a selection of developers providing turnkey solutions for small 
spacecraft ground systems is listed . Prices usually range between 10,000 and 
100,000 USD. 

--- PAGE 180 ---
169 
Table 66: Examples of small spacecraft ground system solutions.  
Technology 
Name Description Developer TRL Status Figures
ISIS Small 
Satellite Ground 
Station
Comprehensive 
ground system setup 
for microsatellites 
and CubeSats (VHF, 
UHF, S-band options)
Innovative 
Solutions In 
Space
(Netherlands)
9
Has been used 
successfully in at least 
one mission: Delfi-C3 
nanosat mission (2008)
Open System of 
Agile Ground 
Systems    
(OSAGS)
Low-cost network of 
three equatorial       
S-band ground 
stations
Espace, Inc.
(USA)
8
Successfully used in 
2002 to operate the MIT 
HETE-2 mission. Can 
accommodate CubeSats
8
Comprehensive Installed on the roof at 
Satellite ground system setup the University of 
Tracking and for microsatellites Clyde Space Strathclyde, Glasgow, 
Control Station  and CubeSats (VHF, (Scotland) Scotland. Operational 
(STAC) UHF, L-band and       for 2 years. No available 
2.4 GHz options) information on 
missions
Mobile CubeSat 
Command & 
Control Ground 
Station         
(MC3)
Network of fully 
autonomous ground 
stations supporting 
the NRO’s Colony 
Program
Naval 
Postgraduate 
School
(USA)
6
TRL assessment 
supported by Griffith 
(2011)
In addition to purchasing new equipment for mission operations, small 
spacecraft operators can also resort to existing capabilities. An example of an 
existing ground system supporting high -frequency co mmunications for small 
satellites is the Open System of Agile Ground Stations (OSAGS). Owned by 
Espace, Inc. , OSAGS is a low -cost network of three equatorial S -band ground 
stations located in Kwajalein, Cayenne, and Singapore, based on software defined 
radio (Cahoy, et al., 2012) . The stations operate in S- band with a 2.025 - 2.0120 
GHz uplink and 2.20 - 2.30 GHz downlink frequency. They can handle 
communication requirements up to 3.5 Mbps. The system is agile  and can  

--- PAGE 181 ---
 
 
170 
 
suppo
rt d ifferent satellite missions simultaneously. The system is readily 
available for any small spacecraft mission in need of ground segment support for 
little cost. Satellites are required to use dedicated software provided by Espace, 
Inc., and they must have t he proper S -band capabilities to communicate with the 
system. 
11.2.2+Operations+
From a regulatory point of view, small spacecraft missions must adhere to the 
same radio spectrum regulations that apply to larger spacecraft. In the U.S., these 
regulations are governed by  the Federal Communications Commission (FCC). 
Missions have the option to use amateur radio frequencies for communications, 
for which licenses are simple and quick to obtain. Since this kind of license is not 
available to governmental entit ies, whose missions are regulated by the National 
Telecommunications and Information Administration (NTIA), a number of 
partnerships have emerged between governmental players and academia.  For 
instance, a number of CubeSat missions developed by NASA Ames R esearch 
Center are operated from the MOC at the University of Santa Clara. Similar radio 
frequency regulations exist in other countries, and these regulatory issues can 
make small spacecraft partnerships increasingly difficult. It is the responsibility 
of the developers to ensure they follow the proper regulations as they build and 
operate their satellites.  
Traditionally, amateur radio bands hav e been the preferred means for CubeSats 
to communicate  with the ground. However, CubeSats are increasingly shiftin g 
from low -performance missions to higher -complexity science or technology 
missions. The larger amount of data produced by these higher -complexity 
missions necessitates higher communication data rates than amateur bands can 
provide. Recent CubeSat missions are indeed moving to higher, non -amateur 
frequency bands to support their data requirements. For instance, the Dynamic 
Ionosphere CubeSat Experiment (DICE), launched in 2011, used the 460-470 MHz 
meteorological-satellite band with L3 Cadet radios to produ ce a 1.5 Mbps 
downlink data rate to support its science mission (Klofas & Leveque, 2012) . As 
CubeSat missions abandon amateur radio bands for higher -speed frequencies, 
their ground system requirements change. Unlike amateur rad io licenses that 

--- PAGE 182 ---
 
 
171
 
 
allow CubeSats to autonomously beacon data to any listening amateur radio 
operator, non -amateur radio licenses prohibit satellite data beaconing. They are 
typically point-to-point, meaning any ground station interacting with the satellite 
must be similarly licensed. Clearly, as CubeSats shift to non -amateur 
communication bands, their ground systems will have to adapt accordingly.  
A possible alternative to using mission-specific ground stations altogether is to 
communicate with satellite phone/data networks such as Iridium, Orbcomm, and 
Globalstar. TechEdSat -1, a 1U CubeSat launched from the International Space 
Station (ISS) in October 2012, had a mission goal to investigate this inter-satellite 
communication method. The satellite had Quake Global Q1000 and Q9602 
modems onboard to test communications with both the Iridium and Orbcomm 
constellations (Löfgren, et al., 2013). Unfortunately, the satellite was forced to 
disable its modems before communications could occur due to a delay of the 
FCC license. In April 2013, another experiment including an Iridium modem, flew 
as an additional payload attached to the outside of the “Bell” PhoneSat’s frame 
(Green, 2013). This experiment successfully communicated the satellite location 
to the Iridium constellation, which then sent the information to the mission team 
via email. The team saw improvements in d ata rate and signal quality as 
compared to communications with amateur radio ground stations. The 
experiment was also able to transmit 10 hours worth of data to the Iridium 
constellation over a 24- hour period, which is a significant improvement over 
typical satellite-to-ground transmission durations  for CubeSats. 
Inter-satellite communication will be tested again soon using TechEdSat -3p, a 3U 
CubeSat launched to the ISS on August 3, 2013  (Harding, 2013) . After 
deployment, TechEd Sat-3p will attempt to communicate with the Iridium satellite 
network using two redundant Quake Global Q9603 modems. There are also plans 
for the 1U AztechSat to test communications with the Globalstar constellation. 
These missions are actively proving the  value of inter -satellite communications  
to relay data to the ground . The potential for saved costs and improved quality 
that can result from small satellites exchanging ground stations with existing 
satellite phone constellations certainly warrants furthe r investigation. 

--- PAGE 183 ---
 
 
172 
 
11.3 On+the+Horizon+
As the ground system and communication options for small satellites and 
particularly CubeSats expand, project managers have to consider the trade -off 
between data quality/size and cost. In the past , many missions depended en tirely 
on amateur radio ground stations to support satellite operation and 
communication, and the amateur radio community has i ndeed proved invaluable 
to the CubeSat community. But as mission complexity and data requirements 
increase, more projects are loo king to non -amateur ground stations and other 
options like inter -satellite communications with satellite -phone constellations to 
meet their needs. These options, however, tend to present higher costs 
associated with radio frequency licenses, software speci fic to a given service 
provider, and sometimes the service itself based on data size or communication 
duration. Many factors can affect the cost and data quality and size of each 
communication method, and for some of these methods the factors are either 
only beginning to be understood in the context of small satellite operations, or 
they have yet to be encountered. The relationship between data quality, data 
size, and cost for these communication methods must be studied over the 
coming years as the various methods are analyzed by current and future small 
spacecraft missions.  
In light of the distributed and highly dynamic ground system topology for small 
spacecraft missions (see Figure ), there is a need for coordination between the 
ground stations involved. This  coordination can be achieved through common, 
openly available software for the management of a ground system. The Global 
Educational Network for Satellite Operations (GENSO) system by ESA is an 
example of this. GENSO is a software networking standard for universities which 
allows a remote operator to communicate with their small spacecraft using 
participating amateur radio ground stations around the globe. Data collection for 
a given satellite could increase from minutes per day via one ground station to 
many hours per day via the GENSO network. Unfortunately, the GENSO project is 
currently on hold, with little expectation of resuming progress. While the 
prospect of GENSO’s future is unknown, the general concept of a distributed 
network of amateur radio ground stations to support small spacecraft operations 

--- PAGE 184 ---
 
 
173
 
 
is still a concept worth looking into. Planning & scheduling an d data management 
are two areas of ongoing research within the field of small spacecraft ground 
systems software.  
The future will see an increasing number of small spacecraft missions involving 
not only single satellites but also swarms, constellations and formations of 
spacecraft (see e.g., Raymond, et al., 2000). A distributed infrastructure of small 
spacecraft made up of dozens, if not hundreds, of units is likely to become a 
standard to conduct low -cost Earth observation and science missions. However, 
the scalability of mission operations without significant automation is limited.  
Siewert & McClure (1995) recall that the number of operators usually scales 
linearly with the number of telemetry nodes needed to monitor the satellite. The 
authors propose tha t, assuming a best case scenario in which a single small 
satellite requires roughly ten operators to ensure mission success (not including 
payload operators), a constellation of hundreds of satellites would require 
thousands of operators and thus an inordi nate operations budget. In the CubeSat 
realm, where operations budgets are generally scarce, conventional operations 
would require an unrealistic commitment from the academic and amateur 
community. To keep costs low and allow for the emergence of next -generation 
distributed small satellite platforms, it will therefore become necessary for the 
spacecraft to perform certain operations autonomously in orbit or, automatically 
from the ground. The challenges related to partially or fully autonomous 
operations and multi-mission operations center s for small spacecraft clusters are 
ongoing fields of research.  
11.4 Conclusion+
The development of small satellite integration, launch, and deployment systems 
to date has largely been focused on leveraging existing launchers for  much larger 
payloads. Many of these heritage vehicles are available with excess mass capacity 
for secondary spacecraft, and a wide variety of integration and deployment 
systems have been developed to provide rideshare opportunities. These 
rideshares help to reduce costs but are often allocated only after the primary 
mission defines most launch criteria. Integration and deployment mechanisms 
are thus designed for minimal interference to the primary mission, usually by 

--- PAGE 185 ---
 
 
174
 
 
pr
oviding electromagnetic shielding and  shock absorption. Adapters exist to 
both secure and deploy secondary payloads of various sizes. Multiple “POD” 
based deployment systems are used to launch 1U to 6 U CubeSats, while flat plate 
adapters and ESPA rings are used to host larger payloads. SoA te chnologies in 
these areas are also responding to increased demand and capability for small 
satellite missions. EELV rockets (United Launch Alliance’s Atlas V and Delta IV) 
are currently the most frequent launchers, especially after the development of 
the E SPA ring. Current launch vehicles, though, are often unable to meet 
demands for missions that need a very specific science orbit, interplanetary 
trajectories, precisely timed rendezvous, or special environmental 
considerations. Launching as a secondary payload also limits the impact of small 
satellite advantages such as quick iteration time and low total capital costs.  
11.5 References+
Cahoy, K. et al.: S-Band CubeSat communications with the Open System of Agile 
Ground Stations (OSAGS). Cal Poly CubeSat Developers' Workshop.  San Luis 
Obispo, 2012. 
Green, M.: PhoneSat Flight Demonstrations: Successful PhoneSat Mission 
Completed. [Online] 2013. 
Available at: 
http://www.nasa.gov/directorates/spacetech/small_spacecraft/phonesat.html  
[Accessed 23 August 2013].  
Griffith, R. C.: Mobile CubeSat Command and Control (MC3 ). Naval Postgraduate 
School. Monterey, CA, USA , 2011. 
Harding, P.: Japan’s HTV-4 launches supplies and science to the ISS. [Online] 2013. 
Available at: http://www.nasaspaceflight.com/2013/08/japans -htv-4-launches-
supplies-scienceiss/ [Accessed 23 August 2013]. 
Hsiao, F.-B., Liu, H.-P., Chen, C.-C.: The Development of a Low -Cost Amateur 
Microsatellite Ground Station for Space Engineering Education.  Global J. of Engng. 
Educ., 4(1), pp. 83-88, 2000. 

--- PAGE 186 ---
175 
Klofas, B., Leveque, K.: The Future of CubeSat Communications: Transitioning 
Away from Amateur Radio Frequencies for High- speed Downlinks. AMSAT 
Symposium. Orlando, FL, 2012. 
Larson, W. J., Wertz, J. R.: Space Mission Analysis and Design. 3rd ed. Microcosm 
Press. El Segundo, CA, 2004. 
Löfgren, H. et al .: TechEdSat: a minimal and robust 1U CubeSat architecture using 
plug-and-play avionics. 9th IAA Symposium on Small Satellites for Earth 
Observation. Berlin, Germany, 2013.   
Raymond, C. A., Bristow, J. O. , Schoeberl, M. R.: Needs for an Intelligent 
Distributed Spacecr aft Infrastructure. NASA Earth Science Technology Workshop.  
Arlington, VA, 2000.  
Schmidt, M.: Ground Station networks for Efficient Operation of Distributed Small 
Satellite Systems. Universitaet Wuerzburg: Schriftenreihe Wuerzburger 
Forschungsberichte in R obotik und Telematik . Band 6, Wuerzburg, 2011. 
Shirville, G., Klofas, B.: GENSO: A Global Ground Station Network . Cal Poly State 
University. San Luis Obispo, 2004. 
Siewert, S., McClure, L. H.: A System Architecture to Advance Small Satellite 
Mission Operations. 9th AIAA/Utah State University Conference on Small 
Satellites. Logan, UT, 1995. 

--- PAGE 187 ---
176 
12. CONCLUSION 
This report provides an overview and assessment of the SoA for small spacecraft 
technology. After i ntroducing small satellites, the SoA of spacecraft integration 
was presented, and the SoA of each of the relevant subsystems was addressed in 
turn. Conclusions are given at the end of each section of this report.  
This report will be regularly updated as emerging technologies mature and 
become SoA. Any current technologies that were inadvertently missed will be 
identified and included in subsequent versions. Reader input is welcome ; please 
email arc-smallsats@mail.nasa.gov  and include “state of the art report” in the 
subject line. 
The appendix that follows  provides additional information and a set of raw data 
collected while researching  this report. 

--- PAGE 188 ---
177 
APPENDIX: TABLES AND ADDITIONAL DATA 
Table A.1: List of small spacecraft missions that have been used as a reference for the research presented in the report  


--- PAGE 189 ---
178 


--- PAGE 190 ---
179 


--- PAGE 191 ---
 
 
180
 
 
 
  


--- PAGE 192 ---
181 


--- PAGE 193 ---
182


--- PAGE 194 ---
183


--- PAGE 195 ---
184


--- PAGE 196 ---
185


--- PAGE 197 ---
186


